MAPF-LNS2: Fast Repairing for Multi-Agent Path Finding
via Large Neighborhood Search
Jiaoyang Li,1Zhe Chen,2Daniel Harabor,2Peter J. Stuckey,2Sven Koenig1
1University of Southern California, USA
2Monash University, Australia
jiaoyanl@usc.edu, fzhe.chen, daniel.harabor, peter.stuckey g@monash.edu, skoenig@usc.edu
Abstract
Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) is the problem of plan-
ning collision-free paths for multiple agents in a shared envi-
ronment. In this paper, we propose a novel algorithm MAPF-
LNS2 based on large neighborhood search for solving MAPF
efﬁciently. Starting from a set of paths that contain collisions,
MAPF-LNS2 repeatedly selects a subset of colliding agents
and replans their paths to reduce the number of collisions
until the paths become collision-free. We compare MAPF-
LNS2 against a variety of state-of-the-art MAPF algorithms,
including Prioritized Planning with random restarts, EECBS,
and PPS, and show that MAPF-LNS2 runs signiﬁcantly faster
than them while still providing near-optimal solutions in most
cases. MAPF-LNS2 solves 80% of the random-scenario in-
stances with the largest number of agents from the MAPF
benchmark suite with a runtime limit of just 5 minutes, which,
to our knowledge, has not been achieved by any existing al-
gorithms.
1 Introduction
MAPF (Stern et al. 2019) is the problem of planning
collision-free paths for multiple agents in a shared envi-
ronment while minimizing their travel times. It is NP-hard
to solve optimally and the core problem of many applica-
tions, such as in warehouse automation, trafﬁc management,
and robotics. Existing MAPF algorithms include system-
atic search algorithms (that are exponential-time but guar-
anteed to ﬁnd optimal or bounded-suboptimal solutions),
rule-based algorithms (that are usually polynomial-time and
complete), and prioritized algorithms (that run fast empir-
ically but are neither complete nor optimal). When facing
challenging MAPF instances, however, the ﬁrst two types
of algorithms suffer from either memory-outs or time-outs
while the last type suffers from incompleteness. One suc-
cessful technique that can improve the chance of ﬁnding so-
lutions is to restart the search with a new random seed (Ben-
newitz, Burgard, and Thrun 2001; Cohen et al. 2018).
In this work, we propose a different way to improve the
chance of ﬁnding solutions. Instead of giving up on the pre-
vious search effort and restarting from scratch, we make use
of the infeasible set of paths produced by a MAPF algorithm
and try to repair it via Large Neighborhood Search (Shaw
Copyright © 2022, Association for the Advancement of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.1998). We call the new algorithm MAPF-LNS2. MAPF-
LNS2 starts from a set of paths that have collisions and re-
peatedly replans subsets of paths to reduce the overall num-
ber of collisions until the paths become collision-free. By
using Prioritized Planning (PP) (Silver 2005) with an efﬁ-
cient single-agent pathﬁnding algorithm to plan and replan
paths and a variety of heuristics to select subsets of paths,
MAPF-LNS2 can solve easy instances as fast as PP and hard
instances signiﬁcantly faster than PP and other MAPF algo-
rithms. Even when MAPF-LNS2 fails to ﬁnd collision-free
paths within the runtime limit, it usually returns paths with
only a few collisions, which is acceptable in many appli-
cations (Belov et al. 2020). The main contributions of this
work are twofold:
1. We propose an efﬁcient single-agent pathﬁnding algo-
rithm SIPPS based on SIPP (Phillips and Likhachev
2011) for ﬁnding a short path that avoids collisions with
a given set of paths and minimizes the number of col-
lisions with another given set of paths. We show that
SIPPS runs 5 times (or more) faster than Space-Time A* ,
an A*-based algorithm widely used by many MAPF al-
gorithms. Thus, we demonstrate that SIPPS can speed up
not only MAPF-LNS2 but also many other MAPF algo-
rithms, such as EECBS (Li, Ruml, and Koenig 2021).
2. We propose a suboptimal MAPF algorithm MAPF-LNS2
that is fast, scalable, and memory-efﬁcient. Although
it lacks theoretical guarantees, it empirically signiﬁ-
cantly outperforms a variety of state-of-the-art MAPF
algorithms, including Prioritized Planning with random
restarts, EECBS, and PPS (Sajid, Luna, and Bekris
2012), in terms of both success rates and runtimes.
MAPF-LNS2 solves 80% of the random-scenario in-
stances with the largest number of agents from the MAPF
benchmark suite with a runtime limit of just 5 minutes,
which, to our knowledge, has not been achieved by any
existing algorithms. Moreover, when given a longer run-
time limit of one hour, MAPF-LNS2 can scale to 8,000
agents on a congested warehouse map.
2 Background
Deﬁnition 1 (Multi-Agent Path Finding) .We are given a
connected graph G= (V;E), a set ofmagentsA=
fa1;;amg, and a start vertex si2Vand a target vertex
gi2Vfor each agent ai2A. At each discrete timestep, an
agent either moves to an adjacent vertex or waits at its cur-
rent vertex. A collision happens when two agents occupy the
same vertex or traverse the same edge in opposite directions
at the same timestep. A plan is a set of pathsfp1;;pmg
that move the agents from their start vertices to their target
vertices. Each agent remains at its target vertex after it com-
pletes its path. A plan is feasible if it contains no collisions
andinfeasible otherwise. Our task is to ﬁnd a feasible plan
(also called a solution ) with a small sum of costsPm
i=1jpij,
i.e., the sum of the travel times of the agents.
Due to the many applications of MAPF, numerous MAPF
algorithms have been proposed in recent years. State-of-
the-art optimal and bounded-suboptimal algorithms, such as
CBSH2-RTC (Li et al. 2021c), Lazy CBS (Gange, Hara-
bor, and Stuckey 2019), BCP (Lam and Le Bodic 2020),
and EECBS (Li, Ruml, and Koenig 2021), usually deploy
a strategy called CBS (Sharon et al. 2015), that uses a
single-agent pathﬁnding algorithm to plan a path for each
agent ﬁrst and resolves collisions afterwards. They provide
quality guarantees for their solutions but do not scale to
large instances as their runtimes are exponential in the num-
ber of agents. State-of-the-art unbounded-suboptimal algo-
rithms include prioritized algorithms, such as prioritized
planning (Erdmann and Lozano-Perez 1986) and PBS (Ma
et al. 2019), and rule-based algorithms, such as PPS (Sajid,
Luna, and Bekris 2012), PIBT (Okumura et al. 2019), and
WSCaS (Wang and Rubenstein 2020). Prioritized algo-
rithms plan paths based on a priority ordering of the agents
where lower-priority agents need to avoid collisions with
higher-priority agents. They are simple and run extremely
fast but can fail to ﬁnd any solutions for challenging in-
stances due to their incompleteness. Rule-based algorithms
move agents toward their target vertices via simple move-
ment rules. Many of them are polynomial-time and complete
in theory but can still fail to ﬁnd solutions within a reason-
able time for large instances.
The idea of MAPF-LNS2 is that, when a MAPF algorithm
fails, we obtain an infeasible plan from the algorithm and
repair it. For instance, for a CBS-style algorithm, each high-
level search node contains a plan, so we pick the plan with
the minimum number of collisions. For a prioritized algo-
rithm, it fails when there is no path for an agent that avoids
collisions with the paths of higher-priority agents. We retain
the already-planned paths and plan paths for the remaining
agents that minimize the number of collisions (instead of
avoiding collisions) with the already-planned paths.
3 MAPF-LNS2
Large Neighborhood Search (LNS) (Shaw 1998) is a popu-
lar local search technique to improve the solution quality for
combinatorial optimization problems. Starting from a given
solution, it destroys part of the solution, called a neighbor-
hood , and treats the remaining part of the solution as ﬁxed.
It then repairs the solution and replaces the old solution if
the repaired solution is better. This procedure is repeated
until some stopping criterion is met. MAPF-LNS (Li et al.
2021a) is an anytime MAPF framework that uses LNS toimprove the quality of a solution obtained from a MAPF al-
gorithm over time. It repeatedly selects a subset of agents
and replans their paths. Motivated by this work, we propose
MAPF-LNS2 that can efﬁciently ﬁnd a solution (instead of
improving a given solution) for a MAPF instance.
To begin with, MAPF-LNS2 calls a MAPF algorithm to
solve the instance and obtains a (partial or complete) plan
from the MAPF algorithm. For each agent that does not yet
have a path, MAPF-LNS2 plans a path for it that minimizes
the number of collisions with the existing paths. Details of
ﬁnding such paths are introduced in Section 4. MAPF-LNS2
then repeats a repairing procedure until the plan Pbecomes
feasible. At each iteration, MAPF-LNS2 selects a subset of
agentsAsAby a neighborhood selection method (see
Section 5). We denote the paths of the agents in AsasP . It
then calls a modiﬁed MAPF algorithm to replan the paths of
the agents in Asto minimize the number of collisions with
each other and with the paths in PnP . Speciﬁcally, MAPF-
LNS2 uses a modiﬁcation of Prioritized Planning (PP) as the
modiﬁed MAPF algorithm.1PP assigns a random priority
ordering to the agents in Asand replans their paths one at a
time according to the ordering. Each time, it calls a single-
agent pathﬁnding algorithm (see Section 4) to ﬁnd a path for
an agent that minimizes the number of collisions with the
new paths of the higher-priority agents in Asand the paths
inPnP . We denote the new paths of the agents in Asas
P+. Finally, MAPF-LNS2 replaces the old plan Pwith the
new plan (PnP )[P+iff the number of colliding pairs
(CP) of the paths in the new plan is no larger than that of the
old plan.
4 Pathﬁnding with Dynamic Obstacles
To make MAPF-LNS2 efﬁcient, we need an efﬁcient single-
agent pathﬁnding algorithm that can ﬁnd a shortest path
for an agent that minimizes the number of collisions with
a given set of paths. Here, we formulate a more general
problem called Pathﬁnding with Mixed Dynamic Obstacles
(PMDO). We use half-open interval notation [a;b)to repre-
sent the contiguous set of integers fxjax^x<bg.
Deﬁnition 2 (Pathﬁnding with Mixed Dynamic Obstacles) .
We call (v;t),(e;t), and (v;[t;1))a vertex, edge, and tar-
get obstacle indicating that vertex v2V, edgee2E, and
vertexv2Vare occupied at timestep t, from timestep t 1
to timestept, and at and after timestep t, respectively. Given
a graphG= (V;E), a start vertex s2V, a target vertex
g2V, and two ﬁnite sets of obstacles Oh(called hard ob-
stacles ) andOs(called soft obstacles ), our task is to ﬁnd a
pathpfromstogthat does not collide with any hard ob-
stacles. We assume that sat timestep 0 is not occupied by
any hard obstacles, and gat timestep1is not occupied by
any hard obstacles either, i.e., there is ﬁnite time from which
no more hard obstacles occupy g. The objective is to min-
imize the number of soft collisions , i.e., collisions with the
soft obstacles, and break ties by the travel time jpj.
1We have tried to adapt two other MAPF algorithms to replan
the paths, namely Greedy CBS (Barer et al. 2014) and PBS (Ma
et al. 2019). But both of them perform worse than PP empirically.
Figure 1: Examples. a1follows the arrow without waiting.
4.1 Space-Time A*
A straightforward algorithm for PMDO is space-time A*,
which is used by many MAPF algorithms such as ID (Stan-
dley and Korf 2011) and ECBS (Barer et al. 2014). Space-
time A* performs an A* search on a time-expanded graph
where each state in the graph is deﬁned by a vertex vand
a timestept, representing the agent being at vertex vat
timestept. The agent can move from state (v;t)to state
(v0;t0)iff((v;v0)2E_v=v0)^t0=t+ 1holds and the
move action does not collide with any obstacles in Oh. In
addition to the regular g-,h-, andf-values, each node in the
search tree of space-time A* maintains a c-value, that rep-
resents the number of collisions of the partial path from the
root node to the current node with obstacles in Os. To ﬁnd
the optimal solution of a PMDO instance, we sort the nodes
in the open list in ascending order of their c-values, breaking
ties by their f-values.
While space-time A* can solve PMDO correctly, unfor-
tunately it cannot do so efﬁciently. Consider the instance
shown in Figure 1(left). If agent a2needs to plan a path that
minimizes the number of collisions with the path of agent
a1, space-time A* needs to expand all nodes whose c-values
are zero before ﬁnding the optimal path, that has one col-
lision witha1at C2 at timestep 2 (because a1reaches C2
at timestep 1 and remains there forever). However, there is a
potentially inﬁnite number of nodes that have zero collisions
as the time dimension is unbounded. So space-time A* may
not return a solution in ﬁnite time. Although one can ﬁx this
issue by restricting space-time A* to generating states only
with timesteps no greater than the maximum of the timesteps
of the obstacles maxft2Nj(v;t)2Oh[Os_(e;t)2
Oh[Os_(v;[t;1))2Oh[Osgand switching to standard
A* (without the time dimension) afterward (Ma et al. 2019),
the number of nodes it has to expand can still be large.
4.2 SIPPS
Safe Interval Path Planning (SIPP) (Phillips and Likhachev
2011) is a fast variant of space-time A* that uses time in-
tervals instead of timesteps to represent the time dimension
of the problem. It performs an A* search on a time-interval
graph where each state in the graph is deﬁned by a vertex
and a safe (time) interval, representing that a particular ver-
tex is free of hard obstacles during the time interval. For
each state with vertex vand safe interval [a;b), SIPP al-
ways prefers the (partial) path that arrives at vas early as
possible within [a;b)and then waits at vif necessary, since
this allows SIPP to prune paths that arrive at vat a later
timestep within [a;b)without losing optimality. SIPP runs
signiﬁcantly faster than space-time A* empirically (Phillipsand Likhachev 2011; Li et al. 2021b), yet it cannot handle
soft obstacles. We thus generalize SIPP to Safe Interval Path
Planning with Soft constraints (SIPPS) for solving PMDO.2
Safe Intervals Asafe interval for a vertex is a contiguous
period of time during which (1) there are no hard vertex ob-
stacles and no hard target obstacles, and (2) there is either
(a) a soft vertex or target obstacle at every timestep or (b)
no soft vertex obstacles and no soft target obstacles at any
timestep. We build a safe interval table T, that maps each
vertexv2Vto a sequence of safe intervals T[v]. To build
T[v], we look at all hard and soft vertex and target obstacles
atvand divide interval [0;1)into a minimum set of dis-
joint safe intervals in T[v]in chronological order. We do not
consider edge obstacles here as they are handled elsewhere.
SIPPS Nodes A nodenin the search tree of SIPPS node n
consists of four elements, namely a vertex n:v, a safe inter-
val[n:low;n:high )wheren:low is also called the earliest
arrival time , an indexn:id indicating that the safe interval
is (a subset of) the id-th safe interval in T[n:v](i.e., inter-
valT[n:v][n:id]), and a Boolean ﬂag n:isgoal indicating
whether the node is a goal node (set to false by default).
Thef-value of node nis the sum of its g-value andh-value,
where theg-value is set to n:low and theh-value is a lower
bound on the minimum travel time from vertex n:vto vertex
g. Each node nalso maintains a c-value, which is the (un-
derestimated) number of the soft collisions of the partial path
from the root node to node n, i.e.,c(n) =c(n0) +cv+ce,
wheren0is the parent node of n,cvis 1 if the safe interval of
ncontains soft vertex/target obstacles and 0 otherwise, and
ceis 1 if ((n0:v;n:v );n:low )2Osand 0 otherwise. If nis
the root node (i.e., n0does not exist), c(n) =cv. In princi-
ple, an agent may encounter more than one soft collision if
it waits within a safe interval that contains soft vertex obsta-
cles. We ignore such cases for efﬁciency. More discussions
can be found in the Theoretical Analysis paragraph.
Main Algorithm Algorithm 1 shows the pseudo-code of
SIPPS. To begin with, we build Tand generate the root
node with start vertex sand the ﬁrst safe interval T[s][1]
fromT[s]and index 1 [Lines 1 and 2]. Tis a lower bound
on the travel time [Line 3]. If we have hard vertex obstacles
at target vertex g, thenTis set to one plus the maximum
timestep of all hard vertex obstacles at g[Line 4] since the
agent cannot complete its path before all hard vertex obsta-
cles atghave disappeared. QandPare regular open and
closed lists, respectively [Line 6]. In order for SIPPS to ﬁnd
the path with the minimum number of soft collisions (and
break ties with the minimum travel time), Qsorts its nodes
in ascending order of their c-values, breaking ties in ascend-
ing order of their f-values. At every iteration, we pop a node
nfromQ[Line 8] and return its corresponding path if it is
a goal node [Line 9]. Function extractPath (n)constructs a
path by repeatedly moving to the parent node until the root
node is found. The reversed sequence of vertices of the vis-
ited nodes is the sequence of vertices visited by the path,
2To the best of our knowledge, SCIPP (Cohen et al. 2019) is the
only existing SIPP variant that handles soft obstacles. However, it
cannot solve PMDO as it cannot handle hard or soft edge obstacles.
Algorithm 1: SIPPS
1T  buildSafeIntervalTable (V;Oh;Os);
2root Node (s;T[s][1];1;false ); // 1 andfalse
indicate that root:id = 1androot:isgoal =false
3T 0; // Lower bound on travel time
4if9t: (g;t)2Ohthen
T maxftj(g;t)2Ohg+ 1;
5computeg-,h-,f-, andc-values of root;
6Q frootg;P ;; // Initialize open and closed
lists
7whileQis not empty do
8n Q:pop ();// Node with the smallest c-value
9 ifn:isgoal then return extractPath (n);
10 ifn:v=g^n:lowTthen
11cfuture jf (g;t)2Osjt>n:lowgj;
12 ifcfuture = 0then return extractPath (n);
13n0 a copy ofnwithisgoal set to true;
14c(n0) c(n0) +cfuture ;
15 INSERT NODE(n0;Q;P ); // Algorithm 3
16 EXPAND NODE(n;Q;P;T); // Algorithm 2
17P P[fng;
18return “No Solution”;
with their timesteps being the earliest arrival time of each
node. If the difference between the earliest arrival times of
two adjacent nodes is larger than one, we add wait actions
in between accordingly so that the agent reaches the vertex
of the former node at the earliest arrival time of the former
node, waits there, and then move to the vertex of the latter
node at the earliest arrival time of the latter node. If nis at
target vertex gwithn:lowT[Lines 10 to 15], it can be
a goal node, but its c-value does not consider the number of
additional soft collisions cfuture that the agent encounters
after timestep n:low during staying at gforever. We thus
terminate only if cfuture is 0 and generate a goal node that
considerscfuture otherwise. Finally, we expand n[Line 16]
and insert it into the closed list P[Line 17].
Expanding Nodes When expanding a node n(see Algo-
rithm 2), we ﬁrst store all reachable vertex-index pairs from
vertexn:vat a timestep within interval [n:low;n:high )in
I[Lines 1 to 5]. A vertex-index pair (v;id)is reachable
iff the agent can move to vat a timestep within T[v][id]
(i.e.,T[v][id]overlaps with [n:low + 1;n:high + 1) ) or
wait atvfrom interval [n:low;n:high )to intervalT[v][id]
(i.e.,n:high =T[v][id]:low). For each vertex-index pair
(v;id)2 I [Line 6], we use [low;high )to represent the
corresponding interval [Line 7]. We update lowto the ear-
liest arrival time at vwithin [low;high )without colliding
with any hard edge obstacles. We jump to the next iteration
iflowdoes not exist [Line 9]. We then ﬁnd the earliest arrival
timelow0atvwithin [low;high )without colliding with any
hard or soft edge obstacles. If low0exists andlow0> low
[Lines 11 to 15], then the agent will collide with a soft edge
obstacle if it arrives at vduring [low;low0)and will not if it
arrives atlow0(and waits at vif necessary). Thus, we gen-Algorithm 2: EXPAND NODE(n;Q;P;T)
1I ; ;
2foreachv: (n:v;v )2Edo
3I I[f (v;id)j
T[v][id]\[n:low +1;n:high +1)6=;;id2Ng;
4if9id:T[n:v][id]:low =n:high then
5I I[f (n:v;id )g; // Indicates wait actions
6foreach (v;id)2Ido
7 [low;high ) T [v][id];
8low earliest arrival time at vwithin
[low;high )without colliding with edge
obstacles inOh;
9 iflowdoes not exist then continue ;
10low0 earliest arrival time at vwithin
[low;high )without colliding with edge
obstacles inOh[Os;
11 iflow0exists^low0>low then
12n1 Node (v;[low;low0);id;false );
13 INSERT NODE(n1;Q;P ); // Algorithm 3
14n2 Node (v;[low0;high );id;false );
15 INSERT NODE(n2;Q;P ); // Algorithm 3
16 else
17n3 Node (v;[low;high );id;false );
18 INSERT NODE(n3;Q;P ); // Algorithm 3
Figure 2: All possible combinations of the relative positions
of the safe intervals of two nodes n1andn2with the same
identity. The timeline is from left to right. Without loss of
generality, we assume that c(n1)<c(n2)in (a), (b), and (d)
andc(n1)c(n2)in (c), (e), and (f). We do not consider
the cases of c(n1) =c(n2)in (a), (b), and (d) because they
are identical to the cases of c(n1) =c(n2)in (f), (e), and
(c), respectively.
erate two child nodes, one with safe interval [low;low0)and
one with safe interval [low0;high ). The former child node
has one more collision than the latter one. If low0does not
exist orlow0=low[Lines 16 to 18], then we generate one
child node as usual (note that the case when low0does not
exist results in one more collision in the child node than the
case whenlow0=low).
Inserting Nodes We say that two nodes n1andn2have
the same identity , denoted as n1n2, iffn1:v=n2:v,
n1:id=n2:id, andn1:isgoal =n2:isgoal. We say
thatn1(weakly) dominates n2, denoted as n1n2, iff
n1n2,[n1:low;n 1:high )[n2:low;n 2:high ), and
c(n1)c(n2). We are interested in dominance because,
Algorithm 3: INSERT NODE(n;Q;P )
1computeg-,h-,f-, andc-values ofn;
2N fq2Q[Pjqng;// Nodes identical to n
3foreachq2N do
4 ifq:lown:low^c(q)c(n)then //qn
5 return ; // No need to generate n
6 else ifn:lowq:low^c(n)c(q)then //nq
7 deleteqfromQandP; // Pruneq
8 else ifn:low<q:high^q:low<n:high then
9 ifn:low<q:low thenn:high =q:low ;
10 elseq:high =n:low ;
11insertnintoQ;
if noden1dominates node n2(e.g., Figure 2(c)), we can
prunen2without loss of completeness. Moreover, we know
from Lines 6 to 18 in Algorithm 2 that a node nsatisﬁes
n:high <T[n:v][n:id]:high iff it is generated on Line 12,
i.e., there is a twin noden0withn0n,[n0:low;n0:high ) =
[n:high;T[n:v][n:id]:high ), andc(n0) =c(n) 1. That
is to say, if the situations in Figures 2(e) and (f) occur, al-
thoughn1does not dominate n2, there exists a twin node
n3ofn1such thatn1n2n3,[n1:low;n 1:high )[
[n3:low;n 3:high )[n2:low;n 2:high ), andc(n3)<
c(n1)c(n2). We can thus prune n2. Therefore, we gen-
eralize the deﬁnition of dominance as follow. We say that
noden1(weakly) dominates noden2, denoted as n1n2,
iffn1n2,n1:lown2:low, andc(n1)c(n2). We
can prune a node if it is dominated by another node. For
situations when two nodes with the same identity have over-
lapping intervals but no dominance relationship (as in Fig-
ures 2(b) and (d)), the intersection of the two intervals would
be explored twice if we expanded both nodes. We know that
the node with the smaller lower bound always has the larger
c-value (since, otherwise, the two nodes would have a domi-
nance relationship), so we can shrink the interval of the node
with the smaller lower bound by updating its upper bound to
the lower bound of the the interval of the other node. This
avoids the duplicate search effort without loss of complete-
ness. The only unconsidered situation is the one shown in
Figure 2(a), in which case we have to keep both nodes. In or-
der to make SIPPS efﬁcient, we use this analysis in SIPPS.
As shown in Algorithm 3, we ﬁrst compute the values of
noden[Line 1] and collect all nodes in QandPthat have
the same identity as n[Line 2]. We need to compare with
each such node so as to avoid duplicate search effort. Con-
sider a node q[Line 3]. If it dominates n[Line 4], then we
do not need to generate nand thus terminate [Line 5]. If it
is dominated by n[Line 6], then we do not need qand thus
remove it from QandP[Line 7]. Otherwise, if the safe in-
tervals of the two nodes overlap [Line 8], then we reset the
upper bound of the interval with the smaller lower bound to
the lower bound of the other interval [Lines 9 and 10].
Heuristics To achieve high efﬁciency, most MAPF algo-
rithms use the distance d(n:v;g )(i.e., the length of the short-
est path) from n:vtogas theh-value of node nwhenthey plan paths for single agents, where the distance ta-
bledis computed during preprocessing. Such a heuristic
is informed as long as the travel time of the optimal path
pis not too much larger than d(s;g). Unfortunately, this
is not always the case for PMDO for two reasons: (1) T
(which is a lower bound on jpj) can be substantially larger
thand(s;g)due to hard obstacles at target vertices; and (2)
T0= maxftj(g;t)2Oh[Osg+1(which is a lower bound
onjpjwhenphas zero soft collisions) can be substantially
larger thand(s;g). Therefore, we compute the h-value of a
non-goal node nas
h(n) =maxfd(n:v;g );T0 g(n)g; c(n) = 0
maxfd(n:v;g );T g(n)g; c(n)1;
whereTis computed on Lines 3 and 4. The h-value of a
goal node is, of course, 0.
Theoretical Analysis Below are two theorems for SIPPS.
The proofs are omitted as they follow the proofs for SIPP.
Theorem 1. SIPPS guarantees to return a path if one exists
and “No Solution” otherwise.
Theorem 2. SIPPS guarantees to return a shortest path with
zero soft collisions if one exists.
One limitation of SIPPS is that, if no zero-soft-collision
path exists, SIPPS may return a path whose number of soft
collisions is larger than minimum because the c-value ig-
nores the soft collisions that occur when the agent waits
within a safe interval that contains soft vertex obstacles. This
approximation is acceptable since the minimization of the
number of collisions itself is an approximation of the CP
minimization (i.e., minimization of the number of colliding
pairs) used by MAPF-LNS2.3We have considered to mini-
mize CP in SIPPS directly, but it is extremely inefﬁcient as
we have to keep track of the set of agents that the partial
path from the root node to each node collides with, which
substantially increases the search space.
Applications Although SIPPS is designed for MAPF-
LNS2, it can be used by a broad family of MAPF al-
gorithms as PMDO is a common problem that needs to
be solved by many MAPF algorithms. Examples include
the optimal algorithms ID (Standley and Korf 2011) and
CBS (Sharon et al. 2015), the bounded-suboptimal algo-
rithm ECBS (Barer et al. 2014), and the prioritized algo-
rithm PBS (Ma et al. 2019) as well as their variants. With
small changes to the priority function used by the open list
of SIPPS (e.g., in CBS, prioritizing nodes with smaller f-
values and breaking ties towards smaller c-values), SIPPS
can speed up these MAPF algorithms while preserving their
solution quality guarantees. Moreover, unlike space-time
3Empirically, We ran MAPF-LNS2 on the random map with
400 agents using the setup described in Section 6 and collected
the results of 84,739 SIPPS runs. Among them, more than 95% of
runs ﬁnd the minimum-collision paths, and 4% of runs ﬁnd paths
that contain only one more collision than the minimum (where the
minimum-collision paths are found by space-time A*). In fact, al-
though space-time A* guarantees to ﬁnd minimum-collision paths,
their CPs are occasionally larger than those by SIPPS.
A*, SIPPS can be applied to continuous-time settings, so it
can also speed up Continuous-Time CBS (CCBS) (Andrey-
chuk et al. 2019) and allows one to generalize CCBS to its
suboptimal variants, e.g., continuous-time ECBS.
5 Neighborhood Selection
The selection of good neighborhoods is critical to the suc-
cess of LNS. Here, we present three neighborhood selection
methods and introduce adaptive LNS that intelligently com-
bines these methods. Each method derives from a different
motivation. Although there might be multiple implementa-
tions for each motivation, we present the one that works well
for us and leave the exploration of other implementations for
future work. We denote the current plan as P, the neighbor-
hood asAs, and the size of Asas a predeﬁned parameter N.
Gc= (Vc;Ec)is the collision graph whereVc=fijai2
AgandEc=f(i;j)jpi2Pcollides with pj2Pg. We
denote the degree of i2Vcasdeg(i).
Collision-Based Neighborhoods A straightforward idea
for generating neighborhoods that can potentially reduce CP
is to select a subset of agents whose current paths collide
with each other. To implement this idea, we ﬁrst select a ran-
dom vertexvfromVcwithdeg(v)>0and ﬁnd the largest
connected component G0
c= (V0
c;E0
c)ofGcthat contains v.
There are two cases:
1. IfjV0
cjN, we put all agents avwithv2V0
cintoAs
and repeatedly add additional agents that might collide
with some agents in AstoAsuntiljAsj=N. At each
iteration, we select a random agent from Asand let it
perform a random walk starting from a random position
on its path and stop when it collides with another agent,
which is then added to As.
2. Otherwise, we select Nvertices from V0
cvia a random
walk onG0
cstarting from vand put the corresponding
agents intoAs.
Failure-Based Neighborhoods The second idea is to rea-
son about why we failed to ﬁnd collision-free paths for some
agents in the previous LNS iterations. Finding a path for an
agentaithat does not collide with a given set of paths is
an essential problem that is repeatedly solved in PP. Thus,
previous work on PP has already studied this problem thor-
oughly (C ´ap et al. 2015). Brieﬂy speaking, there are two sce-
narios that result in failures, namely, (A)aiis blocked by
the agents from the given set of paths “sitting” at their tar-
get vertices surrounding ai(seea2in Figure 1(left)), i.e., all
possible paths for aito reachgiare blocked by some target
obstacles, and (B)aiis “run over” by the given set of paths
at (or around) siduring early timesteps (see Figure 1(right)),
i.e, the agent has no way to go. Therefore, the failure-based
neighborhood focuses on an agent aithat has collisions and
a set of agents whose paths visit sior whose target vertices
are on some path from sitogi. Formally, we ﬁrst select an
agentai2Awith a probability proportional to deg(i)(i.e.,
proportional to the number of agents that agent aicollides
with) and add aitoAs. We then collect two sets of agents
As=faj2Ajpj2PvisitssigandAg=faj2Ajpvisitsgjg,wherepis the path from sitogithat minimizes
jAgj. There are three cases:
1. IfjAs[Agj= 0, then we terminate and return As, be-
cause we are guaranteed to ﬁnd a path for aithat does
not collide with any other agents as aican sit atsiuntil
all other agents reach their target vertices and then move
togivia pathp.
2. Otherwise, ifjAs[Agj<N 1, then we add the agents
inAs[AgtoAsand then repeatedly add additional
agents toAswhose target vertices are visited by the paths
of some agents in AsuntiljAsj=N. At each itera-
tion, we select a random agent ajfromAsand collect
the agents whose target vertices are visited by pj2P.
We select a random agent from the collected agents and
add it toAs.
3. Otherwise, we add N 1agents toAsusing the following
rule:
(a) IfjAsj= 0, we addN 1random agents in AgtoAs.
(b) Otherwise, ifjAgjN 1, we add the agent in As
that visitssithe earliest and N 2random agents in
AgtoAs.
(c) Otherwise, we add all agents in Agand the ﬁrst N 
1 jAgjagents inAs(from the sequence of agents in
ascending order of the timesteps when their paths visit
si) toAs.
This rule prefers agents in Agslightly over agents in Asbe-
cause we ﬁnd empirically that Scenario ( A) occurs more fre-
quently than Scenario ( B).
Random Neighborhoods Generating neighborhoods ran-
domly may sound na ¨ıve but has been shown to be extremely
effective for many problems (Demir, Bektas, and Laporte
2012; Song et al. 2020; Li et al. 2021a). Our third idea there-
fore is to select Nagents randomly, namely each aiwith a
probability proportional to deg(i) + 1 . We add one here in
order to give the agents who do not collide with others a
chance to be selected.
Adaptive LNS (ALNS) ALNS (Ropke and Pisinger 2006)
is a strong variant of LNS. It makes use of multiple neigh-
borhood selection methods by recording their relative suc-
cess in improving solutions and generating the next neigh-
borhood with the most promising method. Formally, we
maintain a weight wifor each neighborhood selection
methodithat represents its relative success in reducing the
CP. Initially, we set all wito1. At each iteration, we select
a methodiwith probability wi=P
jwjto generate a neigh-
borhood and replan the paths. After replanning, we set wito
maxf0;c  c+g+ (1 )wi, wherec andc+are the
CPs of the plans before and after replanning, respectively,
and2[0;1]is a user-speciﬁed reaction factor that controls
how quickly the weights react to the changes in the relative
success in reducing the CP. We use = 0:1empirically. The
weights for the other methods remain the same.
6 Experiments
We compare MAPF-LNS2 against a representative set
of scalable state-of-the-art MAPF algorithms, namely the
mSuccess rate Runtime (s) Runtime per call (ms)
A* SIPPS A* SIPPS A* SIPPS
2501.00 1.00 3.37 0.64 5:4917:19 1:111:79
3001.00 1.00 15.99 2.67 10:928:72 1:942:79
3500.88 1.00>68 9.25 15:8343:52 2:753:72
4000.68 0.88>162>7815:2840:95 3:044:23
Table 1: Comparing SIPPS against A* on the random map.
Runtime per call is the average runtime of a single A*/SIPPS
search.
mSuccess rate Runtime (s)
R F C A R F C A
250 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.80 0.59 0.79 0.64
300 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 13.13 3.41 3.09 2.67
350 1.00 0.96 1.00 1.00 32.57>22 9.11 9.25
400 0.48 0.60 0.76 0.88>192>155>128>78
Table 2: Comparing ALNS (denoted as A) against random
(denoted as R), failure-based (denoted as F), and collision-
based (denoted as C) neighborhoods on the random map.
bounded-suboptimal algorithm EECBS, the prioritized al-
gorithms PP and PP with random restarts (PPR) (where we
repeatedly rerun PP with a random priority ordering until
it ﬁnds a solution), and the rule-based algorithm PPS. In
addition, in order to show the effectiveness of SIPPS for
speeding up MAPF algorithms other than MAPF-LNS2, we
implement a variant of EECBS (denoted as EECBS*) that
uses SIPPS instead of space-time A*. Both PP and PPRuse
SIPP to plan paths for single agents (they do not use SIPPS
as their underlying single-agent problem does not have soft
obstacles). If not speciﬁed otherwise, MAPF-LNS2 uses PP
to ﬁnd the initial plans, ALNS to generate neighborhoods
of sizeN= 8, and SIPPS to plan paths for single agents.
All implementations4were written in C++ and share the
same code base. We use the random-scenario instances on
all 33 maps from the MAPF benchmark suite5, yielding 25
instances per map and number of agents. We conduct ex-
periments on Amazon EC2 “m4.xlarge” instances with 16
GB of memory. If not speciﬁed, the runtime limit is 5 min-
utes. Due to the space limit, we report results only on the
random map random-32-32-20 in Experiments 1-3 and the
warehouse map warehouse-20-40-10-2-2 in Experiment 5.
Experiment 1 compares two PMDO algorithms. Table 1
compares MAPF-LNS2 with SIPPS against MAPF-LNS2
with space-time A* (or A* for short) in terms of their suc-
cess rates (i.e., percentages of instances solved within the
runtime limit), average runtimes (with 5 minutes used for
unsolved instances), and average runtimes per SIPPS/A*
call with their standard deviations. SIPPS clearly dominates
A* with a speedup of more than 5 times. It is also more sta-
ble, e.g., the largest runtime per call for SIPPS is 51ms while
that of A* is 524ms (not shown in the table). This difference
is even larger on larger maps.
4https://github.com/Jiaoyang-Li/MAPF-LNS2
5https://movingai.com/benchmarks/mapf/mSuccess rate Runtime (s) #runs Init
PP PPRLNS PPRLNS PPRLNS CP
100 0.56 1.00 1.00 0.02 0.01 179 105 0.6
200 0.08 1.00 1.00 6.69 0.14 47,114 262 5
300 0.00 0.00 1.00>300 2.67 -1,285 61
400 0.00 0.00 0.88>300>78 - - 316
Table 3: Comparing MAPF-LNS2 (denoted as LNS) against
PP and PPRon the random map. We omit the runtime of PP
as it is equal to the runtime of PPRand MAPF-LNS2 for any
instance it was able to solve. #runs is the average number of
times for which we run SIPP(S). Init CP is the average CP
of the initial plan.
Experiment 2 compares four neighborhood selection
methods. Table 2 compares MAPF-LNS2 with ALNS
against MAPF-LNS2 with the three individual neighbor-
hood selection methods. As expected, ALNS performs the
best as it combines the strengths of the other methods and is
able to use a larger variety of neighborhoods. We also exper-
imented with different neighborhood sizes N= 4;8;16;32
but omit the results since they are similar to those of the pre-
vious work (Li et al. 2021a): there is no global winner, and
larger neighborhoods have larger chances to ﬁnd better so-
lutions but require more time to replan, resulting in fewer
iterations within the runtime limit.
Experiment 3 compares MAPF-LNS2 against other PP-
based algorithms, namely PP and PPR. MAPF-LNS2 can be
viewed as a PP-based algorithm as it uses PP to both ﬁnd
initial plans and replan. As shown in Table 3, MAPF-LNS2
performs the best. It rapidly reduces the CP of the initial plan
generated by PP and, as a result, substantially improves the
success rate of PP. Its LNS framework is a more efﬁcient ap-
proach than random restarts since MAPF-LNS2 requires sig-
niﬁcantly fewer runs of single-agent pathﬁnding than PPR,
which in turn results in signiﬁcantly higher success rates and
lower runtimes. Although MAPF-LNS2 failed to solve 3 in-
stances with 400 agents, its ﬁnal plans in these cases have
only 1, 1, and 2 CPs (not shown in the table).
Experiment 4 compares MAPF-LNS2 against the state-
of-the-art algorithms PPR, PPS, and EECBS (with a sub-
optimality guarantee of 5) as well as our EECBS* (also
with a suboptimality guarantee of 5).6We use the instances
in the random scenario on all 33 maps from the bench-
mark suite with the largest number of agents, i.e., m=
minf0:5jVj;1000gfor each map. Figure 3 shows the re-
sults for each instance, and Figure 4 summarizes the suc-
cess rates. MAPF-LNS2 solves more than 60% of instances
within 1 minute and 80% of instances within 5 minutes.
Its success rate is always the highest for all runtime lim-
its. The instances that MAPF-LNS2 fail to solve are mostly
on highly congested maps, such as the maze and room
maps, and not solved by the other algorithms either in most
6We picked 5 as the suboptimality guarantee because we in-
tended to choose a large enough suboptimality guarantee such that,
if EECBS fails to solve an instance that MAPF-LNS2 has solved,
it is due to the scalability limit of EECBS rather than it using a
too-small suboptimality guarantee.
Figure 3: Runtime and solution quality on all maps. Suboptimality is overestimated byPm
i=1jpij=Pm
i=1d(si;gi).
Figure 4: Success rates on all maps.
cases. Although PPS solves a few instances that are not
solved by MAPF-LNS2, its solution quality is always sub-
stantially worse than that of MAPF-LNS2 (and the other al-
gorithms). EECBS* ﬁnds solutions of slightly better qual-
ity than MAPF-LNS2 for some instances, yet its runtime
is always larger. We did not use EECBS*/PPS to ﬁnd ini-
tial plans for MAPF-LNS2 because, whenever PP ﬁnds so-
lutions, it always ﬁnds them faster than EECBS*/PPS, and
whenever it fails to ﬁnd them, MAPF-LNS2 repairs the plan
rapidly and result in better success rates and runtimes than
EECBS*/PPS eventually. In addition, the difference in the
success rates and runtimes of EECBS and EECBS* clearly
shows the advantage of SIPPS over space-time A*, espe-
cially on large maps. The success rate of EECBS* is al-
most twice that of EECBS for a runtime limit of 5 minutes.
In terms of memory usage, the memory usage of PPS and
EECBS(*) increases fast over time (as they generate longer
and longer paths or a larger and larger search frontier), while
that of PPRand MAPF-LNS2 stays stable. Thus, PPRand
MAPF-LNS2 usually end up with a substantially smaller
memory usage after 5 minutes than PPS and EECBS(*).
Figure 5: Runtime on the warehouse map. Each dot repre-
sents the runtime on one instance, with each line and ﬁlled
area representing the mean and 0.1-quantile values over the
25 randomly generated instances for each number of agents.
Experiment 5 examines the effects of a longer runtime
limit of an hour. Figure 5 shows that MAPF-LNS2 still per-
forms the best. It plans collision-free paths for 3,000 agents
within a minute, 5,000 agents within 5 minutes, and 8,000
agents within a hour.
7 Summary
We proposed a suboptimal algorithm MAPF-LNS2 that
solves MAPF by repeatedly repairing the colliding paths in
a given set of paths. MAPF-LNS2 solves 80% of the most
challenging MAPF-benchmark instances within a runtime
limit of just 5 minutes, which signiﬁcantly outperforms a
variety of state-of-the-art MAPF algorithms. In addition, the
single-agent path planner SIPPS used by MAPF-LNS2 runs
5 times (or more) faster than space-time A* and can be used
to speed up a variety of MAPF algorithms. For example, it
almost doubles the success rate of EECBS within 5 minutes
in our experiments.
Acknowledgments
The research at the University of Southern California
was supported by the National Science Foundation un-
der grant numbers 1409987, 1724392, 1817189, 1837779,
and 1935712 as well as a gift from Amazon. The re-
search at Monash University was partially supported by
the Australian Research Council under Discovery Grants
DP190100013 and DP200100025 as well as a gift from
Amazon. The views and conclusions contained in this doc-
ument are those of the authors and should not be interpreted
as representing the ofﬁcial policies, either expressed or im-
plied, of the sponsoring organizations, agencies, or the U.S.
government.
References
Andreychuk, A.; Yakovlev, K. S.; Atzmon, D.; and Stern, R.
2019. Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding with Continuous Time. In
Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence (IJCAI) , 39–45.
Barer, M.; Sharon, G.; Stern, R.; and Felner, A. 2014. Sub-
optimal Variants of the Conﬂict-Based Search Algorithm for
the Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding Problem. In Proceedings of the
Annual Symposium on Combinatorial Search (SoCS) , 19–
27.
Belov, G.; Du, W.; de la Banda, M. G.; Harabor, D.; Koenig,
S.; and Wei, X. 2020. From Multi-Agent Pathﬁnding to 3D
Pipe Routing. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International
Symposium on Combinatorial Search (SoCS) , 11–19.
Bennewitz, M.; Burgard, W.; and Thrun, S. 2001. Optimiz-
ing Schedules for Prioritized Path Planning of Multi-Robot
Systems. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Confer-
ence on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 271–276.
C´ap, M.; Nov ´ak, P.; Kleiner, A.; and Seleck ´y, M. 2015. Pri-
oritized Planning Algorithms for Trajectory Coordination of
Multiple Mobile Robots. IEEE Transactions on Automation
Science and Engineering , 12(3): 835–849.
Cohen, L.; Uras, T.; Kumar, T. K. S.; and Koenig, S.
2019. Optimal and Bounded-Suboptimal Multi-Agent Mo-
tion Planning. In Proceedings of the International Sympo-
sium on Combinatorial Search (SoCS) , 44–51.
Cohen, L.; Wagner, G.; Chan, D. M.; Choset, H.; Sturtevant,
N. R.; Koenig, S.; and Kumar, T. K. S. 2018. Rapid Ran-
domized Restarts for Multi-Agent Path Finding Solvers. In
Proceedings of the International Symposium on Combinato-
rial Search (SoCS) , 148–152.
Demir, E.; Bektas, T.; and Laporte, G. 2012. An Adap-
tive Large Neighborhood Search Heuristic for the Pollution-
Routing Problem. European Journal of Operational Re-
search , 223(2): 346–359.
Erdmann, M.; and Lozano-Perez, T. 1986. On Multiple
Moving Objects. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation , volume 3, 1419–
1424.
Gange, G.; Harabor, D.; and Stuckey, P. J. 2019. Lazy CBS:
Implicit Conﬂict-Based Search Using Lazy Clause Gener-
ation. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS) , 155–162.Lam, E.; and Le Bodic, P. 2020. New Valid Inequalities in
Branch-and-Cut-and-Price for Multi-Agent Path Finding. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Automated
Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS) , 184–192.
Li, J.; Chen, Z.; Harabor, D.; Stuckey, P. J.; and Koenig, S.
2021a. Anytime Multi-Agent Path Finding via Large Neigh-
borhood Search. In Proceedings of the International Joint
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI) , 4127–4135.
Li, J.; Chen, Z.; Zheng, Y .; Chan, S.-H.; Harabor, D.;
Stuckey, P. J.; Ma, H.; and Koenig, S. 2021b. Scalable Rail
Planning and Replanning: Winning the 2020 Flatland Chal-
lenge. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS) , 477–485.
Li, J.; Harabor, D.; Stuckey, P. J.; Ma, H.; Gange, G.; and
Koenig, S. 2021c. Pairwise Symmetry Reasoning for Multi-
Agent Path Finding Search. Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 301:
103574.
Li, J.; Ruml, W.; and Koenig, S. 2021. EECBS: Bounded-
Suboptimal Search for Multi-Agent Path Finding. In Pro-
ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(AAAI) , 12353–12362.
Ma, H.; Harabor, D.; Stuckey, P. J.; Li, J.; and Koenig, S.
2019. Searching with Consistent Prioritization for Multi-
Agent Path Finding. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI) , 7643–7650.
Okumura, K.; Machida, M.; D ´efago, X.; and Tamura, Y .
2019. Priority Inheritance with Backtracking for Iterative
Multi-Agent Path Finding. In Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI) ,
535–542.
Phillips, M.; and Likhachev, M. 2011. SIPP: Safe Interval
Path Planning for Dynamic Environments. In Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Au-
tomation (ICRA) , 5628–5635.
Ropke, S.; and Pisinger, D. 2006. An Adaptive Large Neigh-
borhood Search Heuristic for the Pickup and Delivery Prob-
lem with Time Windows. Transportation Science , 40(4):
455–472.
Sajid, Q.; Luna, R.; and Bekris, K. E. 2012. Multi-Agent
Pathﬁnding with Simultaneous Execution of Single-Agent
Primitives. In Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on
Combinatorial Search (SoCS) .
Sharon, G.; Stern, R.; Felner, A.; and Sturtevant, N. R. 2015.
Conﬂict-Based Search for Optimal Multi-Agent Pathﬁnd-
ing. Artiﬁcial Intelligence , 219: 40–66.
Shaw, P. 1998. Using Constraint Programming and Local
Search Methods to Solve Vehicle Routing Problems. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Principles and
Practice of Constraint Programming (CP) , volume 1520,
417–431.
Silver, D. 2005. Cooperative Pathﬁnding. In Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Interac-
tive Digital Entertainment Conference (AIIDE) , 117–122.
Song, J.; lanka, r.; Yue, Y .; and Dilkina, B. 2020. A General
Large Neighborhood Search Framework for Solving Integer
Programs. In Proceedings of the Annual Conference on Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , volume 33,
20012–20023.
Standley, T. S.; and Korf, R. E. 2011. Complete Algorithms
for Cooperative Pathﬁnding Problems. In Proceedings of
the International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(IJCAI) , 668–673.
Stern, R.; Sturtevant, N. R.; Felner, A.; Koenig, S.; Ma, H.;
Walker, T.; Li, J.; Atzmon, D.; Cohen, L.; Kumar, T. K. S.;
Boyarski, E.; and Bartak, R. 2019. Multi-Agent Pathﬁnd-
ing: Deﬁnitions, Variants, and Benchmarks. In Proceedings
of the International Symposium on Combinatorial Search
(SoCS) , 151–159.
Wang, H.; and Rubenstein, M. 2020. Walk, Stop, Count, and
Swap: Decentralized Multi-Agent Path Finding With Theo-
retical Guarantees. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters ,
5(2): 1119–1126.