TYPE Hypothesis and Theory
PUBLISHED 21 October 2022
DOI 10.3389/fonc.2022.1033145

OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY

Xu Wang,
Afﬁliated Hospital of Jiangsu
University, China
REVIEWED BY

Yupeng Wang,
Southern Medical University, China
Mario Leonardo Squadrito,
Vita-Salute San Raffaele University,
Italy
Thomas Kerzel,
Vita-Salute San Raffaele University,
Italy, in collaboration with
reviewer MLS
Ioannis S. Pateras,
National and Kapodistrian University of
Athens, Greece
Maria-Concepcion Gutierrez-Ruiz,
Autonomous Metropolitan University,
Mexico
*CORRESPONDENCE

Hao-zhen Ren
renhaozhen1984@163.com
Xing-yu Wu
xingyuwu@sohu.com
†
These authors have contributed
equally to this work

SPECIALTY SECTION

This article was submitted to
Molecular and Cellular Oncology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Oncology
RECEIVED 31 August 2022
ACCEPTED 30 September 2022
PUBLISHED 21 October 2022
CITATION

Xia J-k, Tang N, Wu X-y and Ren H-z
(2022) Deregulated bile acids may
drive hepatocellular carcinoma
metastasis by inducing an
immunosuppressive
microenvironment.
Front. Oncol. 12:1033145.
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.1033145
COPYRIGHT

© 2022 Xia, Tang, Wu and Ren. This is
an open-access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other
forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright
owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is
cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is
permitted which does not comply with
these terms.

Frontiers in Oncology

Deregulated bile acids may drive
hepatocellular carcinoma
metastasis by inducing an
immunosuppressive
microenvironment
Jin-kun Xia 1,2†, Ning Tang 1†, Xing-yu Wu 1*
and Hao-zhen Ren 1,2*
1
Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The Afﬁliated Drum Tower Hospital of Nanjing University
Medical School, Nanjing, China, 2 Institute of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Nanjing University,
Nanjing, China

Bile acids (BAs) are physiological detergents that can not only promote the
digestion and absorption of lipids, but also may be a potential carcinogen. The
accumulation of BAs in the body can lead to cholestatic liver cirrhosis and even
liver cancer. Recently, studies demonstrated that BAs are highly accumulated in
metastatic lymph nodes, but not in normal healthy lymph nodes or primary
tumors. Lymph node metastasis is second only to hematogenous metastasis in
liver cancer metastasis, and the survival and prognosis of hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) patients with lymph node metastasis are signiﬁcantly worse
than those without lymph node metastasis. Meanwhile, component of BAs was
found to signiﬁcantly enhance the invasive potential of HCC cells. However, it is
still poorly understood how deregulated BAs fuel the metastasis process of
liver cancer. The tumor microenvironment is a complex cellular ecosystem
that evolves with and supports tumor cells during their malignant
transformation and metastasis progression. Aberrant BAs metabolism were
found to modulate tumor immune microenvironment by preventing natural
killer T (NKT) cells recruitment and increasing M2-like tumor-associated
macrophages (TAMs) polarization, thus facilitate tumor immune escape and
HCC development. Based on these available evidence, we hypothesize that a
combination of genetic and epigenetic factors in cancerous liver tissue inhibits
the uptake and stimulates the synthesis of BAs by the liver, and excess BAs
further promote liver carcinogenesis and HCC metastasis by inducing
immunosuppressive microenvironment.
KEYWORDS

bile acids, hepatocellular carcinoma, metastasis, gut microbiota, immunosuppressive
microenvironment

01

frontiersin.org

Xia et al.

10.3389/fonc.2022.1033145

The tumor immune microenvironment (TIME) refers to the
microenvironment related to immunological components such
as T cells, tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs), myeloidderived suppressor (MDSCs), and NK cells within tumors.
TIME can be divided into three types, namely the inﬁltratedexcluded (I-E) TIMEs, inﬁltrated-inﬂamed (I-I) TIMEs, and
tertiary lymphoid structures (TLSs) TIMEs according to recent
human and mouse data. For detailed classiﬁcation and
explanation, please refer to (12). TIME is an important part of
the tumor microenvironment. Cancer development and
progression is inﬂuenced by the immune cell composition in
TIME and controlled by the host immune system. Most tumors
undergo a transition from a controllable inﬂammatory response
to an uncontrollable inﬂammatory response, thereby generating
a microenvironment suitable for their growth to promote tumor
proliferation and invasion, metastasis, angiogenesis and immune
escape (13). The proportion of different immune cells in TIME
and certain immune system-related biomarkers can be used for
cancer detection, prognosis and evaluation of treatment
response (14). In addition, TIME also contains a variety of
potential cancer therapeutic targets, such as CTLA-4 and PD-1/
PD-L1, and other immune checkpoint blockade-related targets
are the current hot spots for tumor targeted therapy (15).
Meanwhile, crosstalk between cancer cells and immune cells in
TIME creates an environment that promotes tumor growth and
metastasis, which is important for tumor initiation and
progression (16). For example, in TIME, the interaction
between the ligand PDL1 on the surface of tumor cells and the
PD-1 receptor on the surface of T cells enables tumor cell
immunosuppressive signals to be transmitted to the interior of
T cells, inhibiting the immune function of T cells, thereby
preventing the immune system attacks tumor cells, resulting in
immune escape (17). Exploring the regulatory mechanisms of
the TIME not only deepens our understanding of tumor cells
behavior, but also has the potential to provide new insights into
drugs that promote immune checkpoint inhibitors-related antitumor therapy.
The disruption of local immune homeostasis is an important
reason for the development of many cancers, including HCC
(18). It’s reported that a variety of immune cells express BAs
receptors, and the disorder of BAs balance affects the
differentiation and function of various immune cells, thereby
affecting the occurrence and development of HCC (19).
Recently, researchers observed an interesting phenomenon:
BAs are highly accumulated in metastatic lymph nodes, but
not normal healthy lymph nodes or primary tumors, which
brought us with some new questions: (1) What drives BAs
accumulation in metastatic lymph nodes? Are the BAs
produced by the lymph node metastases themselves, or from
circulating sources? (2) Does high accumulation of BAs in
metastatic lymph nodes accelerate liver cancer metastasis, and

Introduction
Liver cancer is one of the common digestive system
malignant tumors, and its incidence is increasing year by year
(1). The most common histologic type of liver cancer is
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), which is usually diagnosed
with a poor prognosis, especially at advanced stages owing to the
high rate of recurrence and metastasis (2). Although
considerable progress and advances in the treatments in recent
decades, including interventional therapy, curative resection,
liver transplantation, targeted therapy, and immunotherapy,
prognosis of HCC remains far from satisfying (3). The 5-year
survival rate of advanced HCC patients remains poor generally
because of the propensity for metastasis (4). Therefore, it is
urgent to further elucidate the molecular pathogenesis of HCC
metastasis in order to develop novel therapeutic treatments and
improve the survival rate of this malignancy.
Bile acids (BAs) are a general term for a class of amphiphilic
molecules produced by cholesterol metabolism, and their functions
involve lipid digestion, absorption and hormone synthesis (5). In
the human liver, cholesterol is metabolized to primary BAs,
including cholic acid (CA) and chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA),
and then enters the gut for further conversion to the corresponding
secondary BAs (6). CA and CDCA undergo biotransformation such
as dissociation, epimerization, oxidation and 7a dehydroxylation
activity by intestinal bacteria in the colorectum and hydrolases to
generate secondary BAs such as deoxycholic acid (DCA) and
lithocholic acid (LCA) (7). The secondary BAs can also be
conjugated to taurine or glycine to form conjugated BAs.
Secondary BAs are highly “aggressive” and toxic, thereby changes
in BAs composition are the main cause of dysregulated BAs-related
liver disease (8). About 95% of the secondary BAs are reabsorbed by
the intestine, return to the liver through the portal vein, and then
pass through the biliary tract together with the newly synthesized
conjugated BAs, which is called the hepatoenteral circulation of BAs
(9). In the physiological state, the above process is subject to a
sophisticated regulation of a series of positive and negative feedback
mechanisms. For example, the nuclear farnesoid X receptor (FXR)
and membrane Takeda G protein-coupled receptor 5 (TGR5) have
high afﬁnity for BAs, and these receptors coordinate with each other
to maintain BAs homeostasis (10). The expression level of FXR is
down-regulated, and the methylation level of TGR5 promoter is upregulated in HCC, revealing the complex role of the genetic and
epigenetic alterations in HCC environment caused by bile acid
metabolism disorder. The liver has a high-efﬁciency scavenging
effect to maintain the concentration of BAs at a low level, so the
content of BAs in peripheral blood plasma is very small. The
determination of BAs in plasma can reﬂect the synthesis, uptake
and secretion functions of hepatocytes. Therefore, alterations in BAs
composition and distribution can be biomarkers and prognostic
indicators for liver disease (11).

Frontiers in Oncology

02

frontiersin.org

Xia et al.

10.3389/fonc.2022.1033145

concentrations were signiﬁcantly elevated in patients with
HCC compared with normal subjects, thus persistence of
elevated serum total BAs is considered an independent risk
factor of some HCC patients (23). Elevated serum BAs may be
mainly caused by leakage of damaged hepatocytes or changes in
the activity of BAs transfer proteins, not necessarily by upregulation of BAs synthesis. Elevated levels of BAs in the blood
may further aggravate liver damage due to their cytotoxicity, and
at the same time act as signaling molecules to promote the
formation of liver tumors (24). Genetic environment and other
factors cause bile outﬂow disorder, which can lead to cholestasis,
resulting in a severe increase in serum and intrahepatic BAs
levels, especially chenodeoxycholic acid levels, and these patients
have a higher risk of developing liver cancer in childhood (25).
During cholestasis, high concentrations of BAs can generate
reactive oxygen species, damage cell membranes, damage
mitochondria, and lead to DNA mutations (26). Therefore, the
repair response of liver inﬂammation and damage caused by
toxic BAs may promote tumorigenesis.

if so, what is its mechanism? (3) Do accumulated BAs exert some
kind of ‘signal’ to regulate the TIME, thereby evading immune
surveillance and promoting HCC metastasis?

Our hypothesis
We proposed that a combination of genetic and epigenetic
factors, including gut microbiota, epigenetic regulation,
hepatocyte function, metabolic reprogramming, and more, in
cancerous liver tissue inhibits the uptake and stimulates the
synthesis of BAs by the liver, and excess BAs further promote
liver carcinogenesis and HCC metastasis by inducing
immunosuppressive microenvironment (Figure 1).

Justiﬁcation of hypothesis
BAs are highly accumulated in HCC
BAs produced in the liver are metabolized by enzymes from
gut bacteria and are essential for maintaining a healthy gut
microbiota, balanced lipid, carbohydrate metabolism, and innate
immunity (20). The production, transport, metabolism and
excretion of BAs are carefully regulated by the body. The
determination of BAs in plasma can reﬂect the synthesis,
uptake and secretion functions of hepatocytes (21). Studies
found that BAs homeostasis was disrupted during the
occurrence and development of HCC (22). Serum BAs

Regulations of BAs in HCC
BAs receptors play an important role in regulating BAs
synthesis, metabolism and transport. There is a high intracellular
BAs load during cholestasis, and the main detoxiﬁcation
pathway is to activate BAs receptors to protect liver cells and
attenuate BAs toxicity (27). Disorders of nuclear receptor
regulation and genetic variation may promote the occurrence

FIGURE 1

The graphical hypothesis of our study produced by FigDraw. Aberrant BAs metabolism in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) modulate tumor
immune microenvironment by preventing natural killer T (NKT) cells recruitment and increasing M2-like tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs)
polarization, thus facilitate liver carcinogenesis and HCC metastasis by inducing immunosuppressive microenvironment.

Frontiers in Oncology

03

frontiersin.org

