Indian Pacing and Electrophysiology Journal 19 (2019) 145e149

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Indian Pacing and Electrophysiology Journal
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/IPEJ

Accuracy and usability of single-lead ECG from smartphones - A
clinical study
Haakon Tillmann Haverkamp a, *, Stig Ove Fosse a, Peter Schuster b, c
a

Faculty of Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
Department of Heart Disease, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway
c
Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
b

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 15 February 2019
Accepted 18 February 2019
Available online 20 February 2019

Background: Several wireless ECG devices are commercially available for possible screening, monitoring
and diagnosis of rhythms. The ﬁeld is rapidly expanding, and some devices have demonstrated
acceptable qualities. The objective was to evaluate the accuracy, usability and diagnostic capabilities of
smartphone ECG in both patients and healthy controls.
Methods: We used a commercially available smartphone ECG device, connected wirelessly to a tablet, to
record a 30-s lead I ECG in 144 subjectsd20 of whom repeated the test after vigorous exercise. The
subjects included 94 patients under standard calculated 12-lead ECG surveillance; transcripts were
obtained shortly after the smartphone ECG was acquired.
Results: No signiﬁcant differences were found in the QRS, frequency and QT intervals between the two
modalities. Smartphone ECG recordings separated pathologic rhythms (atrial ﬁbrillation (AF)/ﬂutter,
atrioventricular block, regular supraventricular rhythm, and pacing) from sinus rhythms with a sensitivity of 0.75 and a speciﬁcity of 0.97. The speciﬁc diagnosis of AF appeared in 11 patients and was
detected with a sensitivity of 1 and a speciﬁcity of 0.94. There was a marginal decrease in the interpretability of the smartphone ECG after exercise. Inter- and intraobserver variability was low.
Conclusions: Smartphone ECG accurately measures most baseline intervals and has acceptable sensitivity
and speciﬁcity for pathological rhythms, especially for AF. Vigorous activity has a minor inﬂuence on the
readability of the PR interval. Elderly patients may face challenges in recording a smartphone ECG
correctly without assistance. According to our ﬁndings, the smartphone ECG would be applicable as a
screening device for pathological rhythms.
Copyright © 2019, Indian Heart Rhythm Society. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. This is an open
access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Keywords:
Smartphone ECG
Atrial ﬁbrillation
Screening
Digital health

1. Introduction
Different wireless, single-lead real-time electrocardiogram
(ECG) devices are commercially available for efﬁcient screening,
monitoring and on-demand diagnosis. Some devices have
demonstrated acceptable detection efﬁciencies for intervals and
rhythms [1e3]. ECG Check is an FDA-approved [4] mobile heart
monitor manufactured by Cardiac Designs. The method allows easy
acquisition, and the recording can be forwarded to a professional
interpreter of choice. Many of these do-it-yourself monitors are
available, but the question stands as to whether they truly work or

* Corresponding author. Gimlebakken 19C, 5052, Bergen, Norway.
E-mail address: def003@uib.no (H.T. Haverkamp).
Peer review under responsibility of Indian Heart Rhythm Society.

merely provide a false feeling of security. In this article we hope to
shed some light on this matter. Wanting to evaluate the accuracy
and usability of smartphone ECG (spECG)1, we studied both healthy
controls and patients. In the comparison of the spECG to a standard
calculated 12-lead ECG (scECG)2, our hypothesis was that the device would prove to be of poor clinical value. In addition, by using a
questionnaire, we wanted to quantify the user-friendliness, accessibility, technological conﬁdence, and need for assistance. The
study was approved by the Regional Committee for Medical and
Health Research Ethics (REK Vest 2016/729).

1
2

Abbreviation: Smartphone ECG (spECG).
Abbreviation: Standard Calculated ECG (scECG).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipej.2019.02.006
0972-6292/Copyright © 2019, Indian Heart Rhythm Society. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

146

H.T. Haverkamp et al. / Indian Pacing and Electrophysiology Journal 19 (2019) 145e149

2. Materials and methods
This study was a prospective, nonrandomized, and adjudicatorblinded study. After obtaining informed consent, we collected a
ﬁnal number of 164 spECGs from a total of 144 persons. The study
population consisted of 37% females, and the mean age was 58
years. The participants were divided into subgroups based on age
(<25 years, 25e50 years, 50e75 years, or >75 years), each including
at least 20 subjects.

positive was an abnormality only seen in the spECG and a false
negative was an abnormality only found in the scECG. Supraventricular extrasystoles and ventricular extrasystoles were disregarded due to their intermittent nature and the fact that spECG
and scECG did not correspond perfectly with each other in the
temporal aspect under the current study design.
The measured intervals from the two modalities were compared
in Stata/IC [6]. A box plot containing a 95% conﬁdence interval
demonstrated the variance. To determine if there was a statistically
signiﬁcant difference between the two, a paired T-test was applied.

2.1. Acquisition
The subjects included 94 patients with ongoing scECG cardiac
surveillance admitted to the Cardiac Ward at Haukeland University
Hospital, Bergen. The subjects were given basic instructions on how
to use the spECG device and send the result to an email address
created for the purpose. By putting two ﬁngers on the ECG Check, it
registers a 30-s, one-lead ECG and stores it on a device (smartphone, tablet) via Bluetooth. The application's algorithm then
classiﬁes the spECGs as either “Normal” or “Abnormal”, and it also
estimates the frequency using the RR interval. Neither the frequency estimation nor the application's classiﬁcation of spECG was
regarded in the interpretation. The participants performed the
recording as independently as possible, supervised by study investigators and with assistance if needed. Shortly after acquiring
the spECG, scECG reports were extracted for comparison. Following
the ECG-acquisition process, all of the subjects completed a questionnaire subjectively assessing the performance and usability of
the device on a scale from 1 to 4. The observers rated any need for
assistance as “Yes” or “No”.
In total 50 asymptomatic controls were included on the criterion
of “no previously known heart disease”. In the group of healthy
controls <25 years old, 20 subjects were asked to do two spECG
acquisitions-one before and one after vigorous exercise. This
approach was used to ascertain whether physical activity inﬂuenced the readability of the spECG or not. The exercise was highintensity but nonstandardized in form, and the subjects were at
rest during the acquisition process.
2.2. Data
The collected data were anonymized and were analyzed
manually and independently by two observers to avoid bias. The
agreement between the two observers was tested by the intraclass
correlation coefﬁcient (ICC). Four standard ECG intervals were
measured (frequency, PR, QRS, and QT). The QTc interval was
calculated using a digital calculator based on Bazett's formula [5].
The frequency was determined by measurement of 10 beats and
calculation of mean RR time. For scECG, Lead 1 was used to measure
all intervals. Lead 2 was used for frequency only, due to longer
duration on the transcript. The waveforms were not ampliﬁed.

3. Results
As demonstrated in Fig. 1, the percentage of smartphone owners
decreases with increasing age. The need for assistance in handling
the technology, as rated by the observer, increases correspondingly.
The same pattern applies to how easy the participants perceived
the recording process to be, but a large number in the older groups
reported being comfortable using this device independently when
given proper training and instruction.
3.1. Statistics
A total of 820 spECG-intervals were measured. Of these, 10%
were uninterpretable to the reader due to poor quality and noise,
inconsistent ﬁndings or low wave amplitude on the spECG. These
data mean that one or more uninterpretable intervals were found
in 27% of the spECGs. The cause of this phenomenon was primarily
the PR intervals, of which 22% could not be interpreted (Fig. 3,
example 2).
The spECGs recorded during exercise in the control group
demonstrated a decrease in interpretability of the PR interval: from
95% pre-exercise to 87.5% postexercise. All other intervals remained
fully interpretable to the reader. In total, 80% of all spECGs showed
either coarse variations or ﬁner higher frequency disturbances.
These variations and disturbances often occurred due to hand
movements at the beginning of the acquisition, but most were still
readable.
Observer agreement was tested by conducting an ICC, and the
intraobserver value was estimated to be > 0.8, while the interobserver value was >0.6. These values were interpreted as excellent
and good, respectively [7].
By comparing the data from the spECG and scECG in the patient

2.3. Process
The subjects were diagnosed by the observers for the purpose of
the study, and ﬁve pathological diagnoses were employed in
addition to sinus rhythm (atrial ﬁbrillation (AF), atrial ﬂutter,
atrioventricular block, regular supraventricular rhythm and cardiac
pacing). Some of the ECGs were uninterpretable to the reader;
these were categorized as such but were included in the analysis in
order to quantify readability.
Using a 2  2 contingency table, the sensitivity and speciﬁcity
for two independent situations were estimated. We deﬁned an
abnormality seen in both modalities as a true positive, a true
negative was no abnormality detected in either modality, a false

Fig. 1. Questionnaire. Bar graph displaying the self-reported results from the questionnaire in the different age groups.

H.T. Haverkamp et al. / Indian Pacing and Electrophysiology Journal 19 (2019) 145e149

147

(n ¼ 11), atrial ﬂutter (n ¼ 2), atrioventricular block (n ¼ 4), regular
supraventricular rhythm (n ¼ 2) or cardiac pacing (n ¼ 9)) were
deﬁned as abnormalities, the device demonstrated a sensitivity of
75% and a speciﬁcity of 97%. Of the pathological diagnoses, 70%
were identiﬁed identically in both modalities. When only the
presence of AF was deﬁned as an abnormality, the sensitivity was
100%, while the speciﬁcity was 94%. However, this study included
only 11 individuals with AF. The data are displayed in Table 2.
4. Discussion
Many cardiac arrhythmias may be hard to identify, partly due to
their intermittent naturedonly 47% of symptomatic arrhythmias
are discovered using conventional 24-h Holter monitoring [8].
Some of these arrhythmias become manifest only during or after
strenuous physical activity and are occasionally symptoms of
potentially life-threatening conditions [9].
4.1. Arrhythmias

Fig. 2. a: spECG vs scECG. Box plot displaying the four intervals (PR, QRS, QT, QTc) as
measured by scECG and spECG (n ¼ 94). ECG ¼ Electrocardiogram, Sc¼Standard
Calculated, Sp ¼ Smartphone. b: spECG vs scECG. Box plot displaying the frequencies as
measured by scECG and spECG (n ¼ 94). BPM ¼ Beats per minute, ECG ¼ Electrocardiogram, Sc¼Standard Calculated, Sp ¼ Smartphone.

Table 1
Accuracy of intervals (n ¼ 94).
Signiﬁcant discrepancies
PR
QTc

Insigniﬁcant discrepancies

(p ¼ 0,0005)
(p ¼ 0,0089)

(p ¼ 0,342)
(p ¼ 0,153)
(p ¼ 0,156)

Frequency
QRS
QT

group (n ¼ 94) and conducting a set of paired T-tests with a signiﬁcance level of 0.05, 2 of the 5 intervals (PR and QTc) demonstrated statistically signiﬁcant differences. These results are
summarized in Table 1. To visualize the variation, the data were
presented as box plots, as shown in Fig. 2a and b.
3.2. Sensitivities and speciﬁcities
When all of the aforementioned pathological diagnoses (AF

Exercise-induced arrhythmias would be easier to diagnose in
cases when the patient is symptomatic. This diagnosis requires a
device that can be used right after intense activity. Analysis of
healthy controls before and directly after vigorous exercise showed
only a slight decrease in interpretability for the PR intervals
(95e87.5%). This result is consistent with our ﬁnding that the PR
interval is the most frequent among the 10% of noninterpretable
intervals. The subjects were able to handle the device with an
elevated heart rate and a high level of activation. Disturbances were
present in all of the pre-exercise spECGs and they persisted in the
postexercise spECGs. In general, a high degree of artifacts and disturbances was found, but the results were interpretable. This result
indicates that activity does not dramatically affect the interpretability of the spECG. We believe the results to be applicable to the
more physically active part of the population.
Approximately 2e3% [10,11] of the general population has undiagnosed cardiac arrhythmias, and the consequences can be dire
[12,13]. It is estimated that 14,500 Norwegians suffer from a stroke
each year [14] and that up to 25% of these strokes are caused by
undetected and untreated AF [15]. One of the main risk factors for
AF is age [16], and the elderly population could potentially beneﬁt
greatly from ECG Check. This beneﬁt is especially important in new
cases of AF or in patients cardioverted by DC shock or medication.
At 6 months, 57% of patients with only AF experienced at least one
relapse [17], a condition which may go untreated. AF is easier to
treat and results in fewer complications with early detection [18].
However, the data collected in this study show that the need for
help in performing the spECG increases with age. These subjects
also experienced a signiﬁcantly lower degree of conﬁdence towards
and often a lack of access to the required technology. As this group
is probably the largest, one must take into account that they may
face problems using the device and will be in need of more
extensive education and follow up. Even though many of these
subjects reported to be conﬁdent using the technology independently, this limitation might pose the biggest disadvantage of the
ECG Check.

Table 2
Contingency table.
Abnormality

Total

True pos.

False neg.

False pos.

True neg.

Sens (%)

Spec (%)

NPV

PPV

Pathology
AF
Pacemaker

94
94
94

21
11
3

7
0
6

2
5
0

64
78
85

75
100
33

97
94
1

0,9
1

0,91
0,69

Neg. ¼ negative, NPV ¼ Neg.predictive value, Pos. ¼ positive, PPV ¼ Pos. predictive value, Sens. ¼ sensitivity, Spec ¼ speciﬁcity.

