===== paper_000.pdf =====
ARTICLE
Structural puzzles in virology solved with an
overarching icosahedral design principle
Reidun Twarock1* & Antoni Luque2*
Viruses have evolved protein containers with a wide spectrum of icosahedral architectures to
protect their genetic material. The geometric constraints de ﬁning these container designs,
and their implications for viral evolution, are open problems in virology. The principle ofquasi-equivalence is currently used to predict virus architecture, but improved imagingtechniques have revealed increasing numbers of viral outliers. We show that this theory is aspecial case of an overarching design principle for icosahedral, as well as octahedral, archi-tectures that can be formulated in terms of the Archimedean lattices and their duals. Thesesurface structures encompass different blueprints for capsids with the same number ofstructural proteins, as well as for capsid architectures formed from a combination of minorand major capsid proteins, and are recurrent within viral lineages. They also apply to othericosahedral structures in nature, and offer alternative designs for man-made materials andnanocontainers in bionanotechnology.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12367-3 OPEN
1Departments of Mathematics and Biology, York Cross-disciplinary Centre for Systems Analysis, University of York, York YO10 5GE, UK.2Department of
Mathematics and Statistics, Viral Information Institute, and Computational Science Research Center, San Diego State University, 5500 Campanile D rive, San
Diego, CA 92182-7720, USA. *email: reidun.twarock@york.ac.uk ;aluque@sdsu.edu
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2019) 10:4414 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12367-3 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 11234567890():,;
Polyhedral designs are ubiquitous in nature. They are fun-
damental for our understanding of molecular architectures
in chemistry and physics1, and occur at different length
scales, from marine organisms2to protein nanocontainers with
different biological functions3,4. Prominent examples are viruses,
the most abundant biological entities on the planet5and the
causative agents of some of the most devastating diseases known.
Viruses store and protect their genetic material in protein con-
tainers called capsids6, that vary in size and structural complexity.
They range from 20 nm to 800 nm and consist of only a few
dozen to thousands of coat proteins (CPs). The majority of
viruses adopt polyhedral designs with icosahedral symmetry7,8,
that is, their CP positions conform to polyhedral blueprints that
exhibit the characteristic arrangement of the rotational symmetry
axes of an icosahedron (Fig. 1a).
Viruses exhibit this high degree of symmetry as a consequence
of a principle that Crick and Watson termed genetic economy,
namely, the limited capacity in the viral genome to code for the
CPs forming its surrounding capsid9. This favours such sym-
metric architectures, because icosahedral symmetry has 60 dif-
ferent symmetry operations10, reducing the cost of coding for the
capsid by 1/60th, whilst creating a container with suf ﬁcient
volume to store the viral genetic material. Caspar and Klug
extended this idea by introducing the principle of quasi-
equivalence11, which explains how proteins can adopt locally
equivalent, or quasiequivalent, positions in a capsid, by repeating
this local con ﬁguration across the capsid surface. This allows
larger viruses to form, requiring even smaller relative portions of
their genomic sequences to code for their capsids, thus generating
coding capacity for other viral components that are not present in
smaller viruses and enabling more complex infection scenarios.
These two principles have dominated structural virology over
the last 60 years. The in ﬁnite series of icosahedral blueprints
introduced by Caspar and Klug is currently the major tool for the
classi ﬁcation of virus structures12. However, increasing numbers
of virus structures exhibit capsid protein numbers and layouts
that fall outside the CK description, as discussed below for a widerange of examples. This indicates that there are fundamental
design principles underpinning virus architecture, and implied
geometric constraints on viral evolution, that are still not fully
understood.
To address this, we revisit the construction of icosahedral
architectures using the Archimedean lattices classi ﬁed by Kepler
in his classical Harmonices Mundi
13. With these lattices, we are
able to derive eight families of icosahedral polyhedra (derived
from the lattices and their duals) that explain the outliers to the
current classi ﬁcation scheme and at the same time provide an
overarching design principle that encompasses the current
models of virus architecture in Caspar-Klug theory. Using viruses
from different families, we demonstrate that the icosahedral
designs embodied by the polyhedral families derived here corre-
spond to previously unsuspected capsid layouts in the virosphere
and provide a different perspective on viral evolution. As we
discuss below, this discovery also sheds new light on the many
areas of science where icosahedral structures play an important
role, and also provides designs for applications in
bionanotechnology.
Results
Polyhedral models of icosahedral architecture . Virus structures
are prominent examples of icosahedral symmetry in biology.
Their architectures are currently modelled and classi ﬁed in terms
of the series of Goldberg polyhedra14—three dimensional solids
with pentagonal and hexagonal faces —that provide a reference
frame for the positions of the capsid proteins (Fig. 1a). Inparticular, the polyhedral faces indicate the positions of penta-
gonal and hexagonal protein clusters called pentamers and hex-
amers, respectively. The same polyhedra also provide blueprints
for the atomic positions of the fullerene cages in carbon chem-istry, in particular the Buckminster fullerene known as the
buckyball
1. They also provide blueprints for the structural orga-
nisation of a wide range of both man-made and natural protein
nanocontainers. Their duals, the geodesic polyhedra15, are the
architectural designs of the geodesic domes by Buckminster
Fuller.
Goldberg polyhedra can be constructed from a hexagonal grid
(lattice) by replacing 12 hexagons by pentagons (Fig. 1b), as
required by Euler ’s Theorem to generate a closed polyhedral
shape16. The distance Dbetween the pentagons at neighbouring
ﬁvefold vertices is the only degree of freedom in this construction,
and can therefore be used to label the different geometric options
in this in ﬁnite series of polyhedra. Dcan only take on speci ﬁc
values that are constrained by the underlying hexagonal lattice
geometry. In particular, using the hexagonal coordinates handk,
which take on any integer values or zero to navigate between
midpoints of neighbouring hexagons in the lattice, one obtains
the following geometric restriction11:
Tðh;kÞ:¼D2ðh;kÞ=A0¼h2þhkþk2/C0/C1
: ð1Þ
Here, A0corresponds to the area of the smallest triangle between
any hexagonal midpoints, that is, the case h¼1 and k¼0—or
equivalently, h¼0 and k¼1. A similar formula has been
derived for elongated capsid structures17.
Tis called the triangulation number (Fig. 1c) owing to its
geometric interpretation in terms of the icosahedral triangula-
tions obtained by connecting midpoints of neighbouringpentagons and hexagons, i.e., in terms of the dual (geodesic)
polyhedra. Tindicates the numbers of triangular faces, called
facets, in the triangulation that cover a triangular face of the
icosahedron by area. The association of a protein subunit with
each corner of such a triangular facet translates this in ﬁnite series
of triangulations into the capsid layouts in quasiequivalence
theory (Fig. 1d). Such blueprints only permit capsid layouts with
60TCPs, organised into 12 pentamers and 10 ðT/C01Þhexamers
11.
The condition expressed by Eq. 1is therefore a geometric
restriction on the possible values of Tand the possible CP
numbers in the CK geometries. The initial elements of the series
areT¼1, 3, 4, and 7, and therefore the number of CPs contained
in small icosahedral capsids are 60, 180, 240, and 420, respectively
(Supplementary Table 1).
However, this is only one way in which an icosahedral
structure can be built from repeats of the same (asymmetric) unit,
and excludes geometries built from proteins of different sizes
(such as a major and minor capsid protein) or capsids built from
a protein in which one or several domains play distinguished
roles. Such capsid layouts must be constructed from lattices in
which every vertex is identical in terms of the lengths, numbers
and relative angles of its protruding edges, but the relative angles
between different edges at the same vertex can vary, re ﬂecting
occupation by different types of proteins or protein domains.
From a geometric point of view, there are only 11 lattices
(Chapter 2 in Grünbaum and Shephard18) that satisfy this
generalised quasi-equivalence principle, which are the Archime-
dean lattices —also known as uniform lattices13,16. Among these
lattices, only four contain a hexagonal sublattice (Fig. 2a). One of
them is the hexagonal lattice itself on which the CK classi ﬁcation
scheme is based. This lattice is labelled ð6;6;6Þaccording to the
types of regular polygons surrounding each vertex, in this
case three hexagons. However, the hexagonal lattice is only
the simplest grid that enables this construction. Other lattices
containing hexagons at appropriate distances, that is, as aARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12367-3
2 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |         (2019) 10:4414 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12367-3 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
hexagonal sublattice, are equally amenable to the CK construc-
tion, but have until now been ignored. These are the trihexagonal
tiling ð3;6;3;6Þ, the snub hexagonal tiling ð34;6Þ, and the
rhombitrihexagonal tiling ð3;4;6;4Þ(Fig. 2a). These lattices are
also called hexadeltille, snub hextille, and the truncated
hexadeltille lattice, respectively16.
By analogy to Caspar and Klug ’s construction, we classify the
icosahedral polyhedra that can be constructed from these tilings
via replacement of 12 hexagons by pentagons (Fig. 2b). Replace-
ment of nearest neighbour hexagons results in each case in an
icosahedrally symmetric Archimedean solid (Fig. 2c) that
corresponds to the start of an in ﬁnite series of polyhedra,
constructed by spacing the pentagonal insertions further apart. As
a means to characterise different polyhedral structures in the
series, we again use the hexagonal coordinates hand k, now
indicating steps between hexagonal midpoints in the hexagonal
sublattice, to indicate the possible distances between the
pentagonal insertions. In the three additional lattices, the
midpoints of neighbouring hexagons are more distal than in
the hexagonal lattice. Thus, the area covered by a triangular facet
connecting midpoints of neighbouring hexagons (that is, the case
h¼0 and k¼1, or vice versa) is larger than in the CK
construction by a factor αt¼4=3/C251:33 for the ð3;6;3;6Þ
lattice, αs¼7=3/C252:33 for the ð34;6Þlattice, and αr¼4=3þ
2=ﬃﬃﬃ
3p
/C252:49 for the ð3;4;6;3Þlattice, i.e., by factors correspond-
ing to the relative sizes of the asymmetric lattice units (see
coloured highlights in Fig. 2a). The T-number in the CK
construction can therefore be scaled accordingly for the new
lattices as follows
Tjðh;kÞ:¼αjh2þhkþk2/C0/C1
¼αjTðh;kÞ; ð2Þ
where j¼t;s;rindicates the lattice type used in the construction,
denoting the trihexagonal, the snub hexagonal, and therhombitrihexagonal lattice, respectively. In particular, a polyhe-
dron labelled Tjðh;kÞhas the same number of pentagons and
hexagons as a Tðh;kÞCaspar Klug lattice, but the surface area
covered by its faces is larger due to the additional polygons
(triangles, squares) between the hexagons and pentagons. This is
indicated by the scaling factor αjthat refers to the gain in surface


===== paper_001.pdf =====
REVIEW SUMMARY◥
NANOMATERIALS
High-entropy nanoparticles: Synthesis-structure-
property relationships and data-driven discovery
Yonggang Yao †, Qi Dong †, Alexandra Brozena, Jian Luo, Jianwei Miao, Miaofang Chi,
Chao Wang, Ioannis G. Kevrekidis, Zhiyong Jason Ren, Jeffrey Greeley, Guofeng Wang,
Abraham Anapolsky, Liangbing Hu *
BACKGROUND: High-entropy nano particles con-
tain more than four elements uniformly mixed
into a solid-solution structure, offering oppor-
tunities for materials discovery, property op-timization, and advanced applications. For
example, the compositional flexibility of high-
entropy nanoparticles enables fine-tuning of
the catalytic activity and selectivity, and high-
entropy mixing offers structural stability under
harsh operating conditions. In addition, the
multielemental synergy in high-entropy nano-
particles provides a diverse range of adsorp-
tion sites, which is ide al for multistep tandem
reactions or reactions that require multi-
functional catalysts. However, the wide range
of possible compositions and complex atomic
arrangements also create grand challenges
in synthesizing, characterizing, understand-
ing, and applying high-entropy nanoparticles.
For example, controllable synthesis is chal-lenging given the different physicochemical
properties within the multielemental com-
positions combined with the small size and
large surface area. Moreover, random multi-elemental mixing can make it difficult to
precisely characterize the individual nanopar-
ticles and their statistical variations. Without
rational understanding and guidance, efficient
compositional design and performance opti-
mization within the huge multielemental space
is nearly impossible.
ADVANCES: The comprehensive study of high-
entropy nanoparticles has become feasible
because of the rapid development of synthetic
approaches, high-resolution characterization,
high-throughput experimentation, and data-
driven discovery. A diverse range of compositions
and material libraries have been developed,
many by using nonequilibrium “shock ”–basedmethods designed to induce single-phase mix-
ing even for traditionally immiscible elemen-
tal combinations. The nanomaterial types have
also rapidly evolved from crystalline metallic
alloys to metallic glasses, oxides, sulfides,
phosphates, and others. Advanced characteri-
zation tools have been used to uncover the
structural complexities of high-entropy nano-
particles. For example, a tomic electron tomog-
raphy has been used for single-atom-level
resolution of the three-d imensional positions
of the elements and their chemical environ-
ments. Finally, high-entropy nanoparticles
have already shown promise in a wide rangeof catalysis and energy te chnologies because of
their atomic structure and tunable electronic
states. The development of high-throughput
computational and expe rimental methods can
accelerate the material exploration rate and
enable machine-learning tools that are ideal
for performance prediction and guided opti-
mization. Materials discovery platforms, such
as high-throughput exploration and data
mining, may disruptively supplant con-
ventional trial-and-error approaches for de-
veloping next-generation catalysts based on
high-entropy nanoparticles.
OUTLOOK: High-entropy nanoparticles provide
an enticing material platform for different ap-
plications. Being at an initial stage, enormous
opportunities and grand challenges exist for
these intrinsically comp lex materials. For the
next stage of research and applications, we
need (i) the controlled synthesis of high-
entropy nanoparticles with targeted sur-
face compositions and atomic arrangements;
(ii) fundamental studies of surfaces, order-
ing, defects, and the dynamic evolution of
high-entropy nanoparticles under catalytic
conditions through precise structural char-
acterization; (iii) identification and under-
standing of the active sites and performance
origin (especially the enhanced stability) of
high-entropy nanoparticles; and (iv) high-
throughput computational and experimen-
tal techniques for rapid screening and datamining toward accelerated exploration of
high-entropy nanopart icles in a multiele-
mental space. We expect that discoveries
about the synthesis-structure-property rela-
tionships of high-entropy nanoparticles and
their guided discovery will greatly benefit
a range of applications for catalysis, energy,
and sustainability.▪RESEARCH
Yao et al .,Science 376, 151 (2022) 8 April 2022 1o f1
The list of author affiliations is available in the full article online.
*Corresponding author. Email: binghu@umd.edu
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
Cite this article as Y. Yao et al. ,Science 376, eabn3103
(2022). DOI: 10.1126/science.abn3103
READ THE FULL ARTICLE AT
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abn3103
Diverse applicationsMultidimensional space
(composition/structure)
High-throughput screening 
and machine learningAdvanced 
characterization
NH3 *NHx
*NN2 + H2
High-entropy nanoparticles and data-driven discovery. Emerging high-entropy nanoparticles feature
multielemental mixing within a large compositional space and can be used for diverse applications,
particularly for catalysis. High-throughput and machine-learning tools, coupled with advanced characteriza-
tion techniques, can substantially accelerate the optimization of these high-entropy nanoparticles, forming a
closed-loop paradigm toward data-driven discovery.CREDITS: TOP RIGHT: YANG ET AL. ,NATURE 592,6 0–64 (2021); CENTER: JIAQI DAI; BOTTOM RIGHT: XIE ET AL. ,NAT. COMMUN. 10, 4011 (2019)

REVIEW◥
NANOMATERIALS
High-entropy nanoparticles: Synthesis-structure-
property relationships and data-driven discovery
Yonggang Yao1†, Qi Dong1†, Alexandra Brozena1, Jian Luo2, Jianwei Miao3, Miaofang Chi4,
Chao Wang5, Ioannis G. Kevrekidis5, Zhiyong Jason Ren6, Jeffrey Greeley7, Guofeng Wang8,
Abraham Anapolsky9, Liangbing Hu1,10*
High-entropy nanoparticles have become a rapidly growing area of research in recent years. Because of
their multielemental compositions and unique high-entropy mixing states (i.e., solid-solution) that
can lead to tunable activity and enhanced stability, these nanoparticles have received notable attention
for catalyst design and exploration. However, this strong potential is also accompanied by grandchallenges originating from their vast compositional space and complex atomic structure, which hinder
comprehensive exploration and fundamental understanding. Through a multidisciplinary view of
synthesis, characterization, catalytic applications, high-throughput screening, and data-driven materials
discovery, this review is dedicated to discussing the important progress of high-entropy nanoparticles and
unveiling the critical needs for their future development for catalysis, energy, and sustainability applications.
High-entropy nanoparticles have received
a great amount of attention in recent
years because of their multielemental
composition (typically five or more
elements) and homogeneously mixed
solid-solution state, providing not only anenormous number of combinations for ma-
t e r i a l sd i s c o v e r yb u ta l s oau n i q u em i c r o -
structure for property optimization (Fig. 1A)
(1–3). Early reports of multielemental (five
or more) alloy nanoparticles suggested the
potential of these unique materials ( 4–6) but
did not provide detailed structural understand-
ing or reveal a general synthesis route for
different compositions. In 2016, Mirkin and
colleagues made a substantial advance in
synthesizing various compositions of multi-
elemental nanoparticles using confined nano-
reactors ( 7). However, these materials featured
heterogeneous structures with phase separa-
tion due to elemental immiscibility. Recentadvances in ultrafast synthetic methodologies,
such as nonequilibrium thermal-shock-based
approaches, have since enabled a variety of
high-entropy nanopart icles without phase
separation, even among immiscible elemental
combinations (Fig. 1B) ( 8). In a typical thermal
shock process (e.g., 2000 K in 55 ms), the rapid
heating of precursors to a high temperature
induces multielemental mixing and alloying
to achieve a solid-solution state, whereas the
short heating duration a nd subsequent rapid
quenching help to retain and freeze the uni-
form structure and small particle size ( 8). Since
then, various high-entro py nanomaterials, in-
cluding alloys (e.g., PtPdFeCoNiAuCuSn)
(9–14), metallic glasses (e.g., amorphous
CoCrMnNiV) ( 15,16), intermetallics [e.g., L1
0
type (Pt 0.8Pd0.1Au0.1)(Fe 0.6Co0.1Ni0.1Cu0.1Sn0.1)]
(17,18), oxides, fluorides, sulfides, carbides,
MXenes ( 19–25), and van der Waals materials
(e.g., dichalcogenides, halides, and phospho-
rus trisulfide) ( 26), have all been successfully
demonstrated using thermal shock and other
nonequilibrium approaches.
Despite having been developed only recent-
ly, high-entropy nanoparticles have already
shown great promise for a range of emerging
energy-related processes and applications,
particularly in catalysis (Fig. 1C) ( 27–36). The
compositional flexibili ty of high-entropy nano-
particles enables fine-tuning of the catalytic
activity, whereas the high-entropy solid-
solution mixing potentially offers structural
stability 1that is critical for operation under
harsh conditions. For example, non-noble
(Co xMo0.7-x)Fe0.1Ni0.1Cu0.1nanoparticles have
been shown to overcome the immiscibility of
Co–Mo, allowing for robust tuning of the Co –Mo
ratios and associated surface adsorption proper-ties. As a result, (Co
0.25Mo 0.45)Fe0.1Ni0.1Cu0.1nanoparticles have demonstrated a fourfoldimprovement in ammonia decomposition com-
pared with noble Ru and are stable at 500°C
for 50 hours without noticeable degradation
(36). In another example, Pt
18Ni26Fe15Co14Cu27
nanoparticles were developed for electro-
chemical hydrogen evolution and showed a
lower onset potential (11 versus 84 mV), a
higher activity (10.98 versus 0.83 A/mg Pt), and
excellent stability compared with commercial
Pt–C catalysts ( 11). These examples epitomize
the strong potential of high-entropy nano-
particles as highly efficient and cost-effective
catalysts ( 9,11,12,20,36–39).
Compared with material s having relatively
simple compositions (i.e., one to three elements),
high-entropy nanoparticles have two distinct
features: (i) a vast compositional space that
derives from the multielemental combinations
and (ii) complex atomic configurations due
to the random multielemental mixing. The
former provides huge compositional choices
for catalyst design and development, and the
latter makes these materials fundamentally
different from conventional catalysts in that
they feature a diverse range of adsorption
sites and a near-continuous binding energy
distribution pattern ( 40,41). These qualities
a r ep a r t i c u l a r l ya t t r a c t i v ef o rc o m p l e xo r
tandem reactions that involve numerous
intermediate steps and require multifunction-
ality ( 28,38,40,42–44).
However, along with these opportunities,
the vast number of possible compositions and
complex atomic arrangements create grand
challenges in the design, synthesis, charac-
terization, and application of these unique
nanomaterials. First, considering the wide
span of physicochemical properties (e.g., atomic
size and electronic structure) among the dif-
ferent constituent elements, synthesizing high-
entropy nanoparticles in a highly controllable
manner is difficult. Moreover, characterizing
the detailed structure of high-entropy nano-
particles, such as the reactive surfaces and
defects, is challenging or still lacking because
of the complex atomic configurations andmultiple elements of simi lar electron contrasts.
Additionally, we have very limited knowledge
of how elemental composition and synthesis
methods affect the structure and properties
of high-entropy nanoparticles. Although iden-
tifying these relationships for such complex
materials is a daunting task, understanding
them is critical to guidi

===== paper_002.pdf =====
RESEARCHARTICLE PHYSICS
Design strategies for the self-assembly of polyhedral shells
DiogoE.P.Pintoa,PetrŠulcb,cID,FrancescoSciortinoaID,andJohnRussoa,1ID
EditedbyChadMirkin,NorthwesternUniversity,Evanston, IL;receivedNovember14,2022;acceptedMarch16,2023
Thecontrolovertheself-assemblyofcomplexstructuresisalong-standingchallengeof
materialscience,especiallyatthecolloidalscale,asthedesiredassemblypathwayisoften
kineticallyderailedbytheformationofamorphousaggregates.Here,weinvestigatein
detailtheproblemoftheself-assemblyofthethreeArchimedeanshellswithﬁvecontact
pointspervertex,i.e.,theicosahedron,thesnubcube,andthesnubdodecahedron.We
use patchy particles with ﬁve interaction sites (or patches) as model for the building
blocksandrecasttheassemblyproblemasaBooleansatisﬁabilityproblem(SAT)forthe
patch–patch interactions. This allows us to ﬁnd effective designs for all targets and to
selectively suppress unwanted structures. By tuning the geometrical arrangement and
the speciﬁc interactions of the patches, we demonstrate that lowering the symmetry
of the building blocks reduces the number of competing structures, which in turn
can considerably increase the yield of the target structure. These results cement SAT-
assemblyasaninvaluabletooltosolveinversedesignproblems.
nanotechnology |capsids |self-assembly |SAT
Self-assembly encompasses a large array of phenomena through which materials are
formedusingsimplemicroscopicbuildingblocks(1).Innature,manystrikingexamples
of self-assembly are found, from virus capsids to lipid bilayers (2–6), but assembling
new synthetic materials has proved to be very challenging. Successful examples of
artiﬁcial self-assembly have required a large dose of educated guesses (7–24). One
of the main difﬁculties resides in how to optimize the geometrical properties or the
interactions between the building blocks without leading to competing or kinetically
arrestedconﬁgurations(25–28).
Here, we focus on the self-assembly of ﬁnite-size structures and in particular on
speciﬁc polyhedral shells. From an application standpoint, the potential of closed shells
to act as a drug delivery system has been a widely researched topic, where a given drug
is encapsulated within a closed shell and then driven to a speciﬁc diseased area where
the drug is locally released such that the least amount of nondiseased tissue is affected
(29,30).Forthis,theshellneedstoclosearoundaspeciﬁcreagentandthenopenwhen
externalconditionsaremet.Recently,therehavebeensuitableexperimentalrealizations,
for example, using DNA-origami, where selective interactions can be introduced to
mimic patchy particles(31–35).
When focusing on ﬁnite-size shells, additional challenges arise compared to the ones
encountered in the self-assembly of crystal structures. First, the self-assembly occurs
exclusively from the gas phase, which rules out the possibility to use (critical point
induced)densityﬂuctuationstoacceleratetherateofaggregation(36),asfrequentlydone
in the case of crystals. On the contrary, the formation of ﬁnite-size aggregates stabilizes
the gas phase to high densities with respect to the liquid phase, possibly introducing a
densitydependenceoftheaggregationpathway.Second,thesmallsizeoftheaggregates,
compared to the inﬁnitely repeating units of a crystal, can stabilize kinetic traps, i.e.,
structures whose free energy is not as low as the one of the target structure but that
require an exceedingly long waiting time to break. Lastly, the formation of ﬁnite-size
aggregates is a continuous process and is not accompanied by a phase transition as in
crystals. The absence of a critical size of formation (i.e., the critical nucleus) means that
it is not sufﬁcient to suppress a handful of competing structures at one length scale but
that the assembly process has to proceed without defects at every stage. This problem is
reﬂected inthedifﬁculty ofperfectly closinglarge-size aggregates, such as capsids(31).
Here, we show how to successfully tackle these challenges by transforming the self-
assembly problem into a Boolean satisﬁability problem. This technique, named SAT-
assembly, was recently introduced by some of us to successfully assemble challenging
crystalline structures, with an emphasis on structures that have photonic applications,
suchasthetetrastack(37)anddiamondcubiccrystal(37–39),andstructureswithahigh
number of atoms in the unit cells, such as clathrate crystals (37). The SAT-assemblySigniﬁcance
Natureisabletoself-assemble
complexsupramolecular
structuresfromelementary
buildingblocksrarelymaking
mistakes.Forexample,
adenovirusnucleocapsidsare
formedfromdiﬀerentproteins
thatassembleandfoldintoa
regularicosahedralshell.Oneof
thegoalsofnanotechnologyisto
emulatethesestrategiesto
producenewsyntheticmaterials.
Unfortunately,mostartificial
designsfailbecausetheunits
misassembleintoincorrect,and
oftenirregular,structures.We
hereproposeadesignstrategy
forself-assemblingfinite-size
shellswheretheinteraction
betweentheunitsisobtained
fromthesolutiontoaBoolean
satisfiabilityproblem(SAT).We
demonstratethatthisquite
generalapproachexcelsin
self-assemblingdiﬀerent
Archimedeanpolyhedralshells
withhighyield,revealingsome
generalrulesguidingthedesign
ofsuccessfulassembles.
Authorcontributions:D.E.P.P.,P.Š.,F.S.,andJ.R.designed
research;D.E.P.P.performedresearch;D.E.P.P.analyzed
data;andD.E.P.P.,P.Š.,F.S.,andJ.R.wrotethepaper.
Theauthorsdeclarenocompetinginterest.
ThisarticleisaPNASDirectSubmission.
Copyright ©2023theAuthor(s).PublishedbyPNAS.
This article is distributed under Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License 4.0
(CCBY-NC-ND).
1Towhomcorrespondencemaybeaddressed.Email:
john.russo@uniroma1.it.
This article contains supporting information online
athttp://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.
2219458120/-/DCSupplemental .
PublishedApril11,2023.
PNAS2023 Vol.120 No.16 e2219458120 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2219 4581201of10
designpipelineallowsforafastsearchofdesignspaceforsolutions
thatcanformdesiredtargetstructuresand—equallyimportant—
avoid undesired alternative assemblies or kinetic traps. In this
article, we will demonstrate a successful application of the SAT-
assemblyframeworktotheassemblyofcomplexpolyhedralshells.
Wefocusonthethreepolyhedrathatcanassemblefrombuilding
blockswithacoordinationnumberofﬁve,i.e.,theicosahedron,
the snub cube, and the snub dodecahedron. As building blocks
we use patchy particles, which are a model of hard spheres with
attractive patches on their surface (22, 40–45). These represent
a coarse-grained approach to describe multiple systems, e.g.,
colloids, proteins, polymers, DNA origami (14, 15, 39, 46, 47).
By associating to each patch a color, we can translate the self-
assembly problem into the problem of ﬁnding how patch colors
shouldinteracttoformthetargetstructure,whileatthesametime
avoidingcompetingstructures.Itispossiblethatdifferentnatural
structuresfollowsimilarstrategiestotheexamplesexploredhere,
with focus on selectivity. For example, adenoviruses are known
for their icosahedral nucleocapsid which is assembled by two
main proteins and three minor ones that mostly inﬂuence the
interactions (48). As such, these processes evolved to require
a minimum level of speciﬁcity in the building blocks and
interactions inorderto form regular shells.
In the manuscript, we will ﬁrst show that, except for the
smalleststructure(theicosahedron),theseshellsdonotassemble
correctly if only the geometrical information about the target
structure(the“educatedguess”)isused.Instead,wewillintroduce
multicolored designs, i.e., designs where more than one patch
type is present. As the number of patch types increases, so does
the complexity of the design, making SAT a necessary tool to
beabletoﬁndthedesiredinteractionsbetweenpatchcolorsthat
canformthetargetshellandavoidalternativeassemblies.Wewill
showthattheyieldofthedifferentstructuresdependssensitively,
in addition to the particular geometrical patch arrangement, on
the number of colors used but that the different results can be
rationalized by looking at the symmetry of the designs: Less
symmetrical building blocks self-assemble with the highest yield
in the target structures. In particular, chiraldesigns, i.e., not
having a mirror-plane symmetry, are found to be very effective
building blocks regardless of the chirality of the target structure.
We also explore the role of geometrical frustration, where the
angle between the patches does not match the angle between
the particles in the target structure, to create designs where
the target structure depends on external conditions (in our case
the concentration of building blocks). We also emphasize how
SAT is crucial to assemble a given structure while excluding
competingones.Weﬁndthatmutualexclusionrequirescomplex
designs,withmultiplepatchcolorsandparticlespecies(different
patch color arrangement in different particles), which lead to
higher yields and assemblies that are more robust to geometrical
frustrations. Lastly, we discuss how increasing the number of
colors and species can slow down the short-time kinetics of
the assembly process, which emphasizes the design principles
discussedhere to reachoptimalresults.
1. Models
Weconsiderasystemcomposedof Npatchyparticlesinacubic
boxoflength L.Theparticlesarecharacterizedbyahardcoreof
diameter σwithﬁvepatchesonitssurfacelocatedononesideof
theparticleformingastar-likeshapewithmirrorsymmetryalong
one of the patches (as seen in the center of Fig. 1). We follow
the same SAT formulation as the one in ref. 38. We consider
that each patch can have a given color xcbetween 1 ≤xc≤Nc,
Fig.1.SchematicrepresentationofthethreeArchimedeanstructureswith
fivecontactpointspervertexandofavalence-fiveparticlewithtwotypesof
patches(greenandred)whichaccordingtotheSATalgorithmcanassemble
intothethreediﬀerentpolyhedronshells.Notethat,inthisspecificdesign,
thegreenpatchesonlyinteractwithgreenwhiletheredpatchesonlyinteract
withred. /u1D6FEindicatesthein-planeanglebetweenthetworedpatches.
whereNcisthetotalnumberofdistinctcolors.Thesecolorscan
be distributed onto the patches in speciﬁc arrangements, each
unique sequence can be considered a particles species xp, thus
1≤xp≤Np, whereNpis the total number of distinct species.
SATisthenusedtoﬁndifagivencombinationof NpandNccan
satisfy a given polyhedral shell, e.g., if it satisﬁes the topological
constraints of the target structure, and to ﬁnd how the colors
are arranged on the different species. In SI Appendix , we go into
moredetailon thedifferentconstraints(clauses)usedinSAT.
We study the self-assembly outcome of our designs focusing
on the static yield, deﬁned as the ratio of the number of fully
formed target structures over the total number of aggregates.
Thisquantityismeasuredoncethebondprobabilityhasreached
a (metastable) equilibrium state, that in our case is obtained
via Monte Carlo simulations using aggregation-biased moves
and using the Kern–Frenkel potential (49, 50) to describe the
interaction between patches ( Methods). In Section 3D, we also
consider the short-time aggregation kinetics of our designs, i.e.,
the rate at which particles form aggregates from the solution.
To study this we use Molecular Dynamics simulations using a
continuous versionoftheKern–Frenkel potential ( Methods).
Our self-assembly problem is represented schematically in
Fig. 1. Starting with patchy particles of valence ﬁve, we wish
to selectively assemble three Archimedean polyhedral shells: the
12-particle icosahedron , the 24-particle snub cube, and the 60-
particlesnub dodecahedron . In the ideal structure, three contact
points (patches 1, 2, and 3) are in the same location in all three
polyhedral shells, making an in-plane angle with the center of
the particle of 60◦, while the other two contact points differ for
the in-plane angle that patches 4 and 5 make with the center of
the particle, which we call γ. Note that in the ideal structure,
γ=60◦for the icosahedron, γ=90◦for the snub cube,
andγ=108◦for 

===== paper_003.pdf =====
Minimal Design Principles for Icosahedral
Virus Capsids
Manuel Mart ín-Bravo, Jose M. Gomez Llorente, *Javier Hern ández-Rojas, *and David J. Wales
Cite This: ACS Nano 2021, 15, 14873 −14884 Read Online
ACCESS Metrics & More Article Recommendations
ABSTRACT: The geometrical structures of single- and multi-
ple-shell icosahedral virus capsids are reproduced as the targetsthat minimize the cost corresponding to relatively simple designfunctions. Capsid subunits are ﬁrst identi ﬁed as building blocks
at a given coarse-grained scale and then represented in these
functions as point particles located on an appropriate numberof concentric spherical surfaces. Minimal design cost is assignedto optimal spherical packings of the particles. The costfunctions are inspired by the packings favored for the Thomsonproblem, which minimize the electrostatic potential energy between identical charged particles. In some cases, icosahedralsymmetry constraints are incorporated as external ﬁelds acting on the particles. The simplest cost functions can be obtained by
separating particles in disjoint nonequivalent sets with distinct interactions, or by introducing interacting holes (the absence ofparticles). These functions can be adapted to reproduce any capsid structure found in real viruses. Structures absent in Naturerequire signi ﬁcantly more complex designs. Measures of information content and complexity are assigned to both the cost
functions and the capsid geometries. In terms of these measures, icosahedral structures and the corresponding cost functionsare the simplest solutions.
KEYWORDS: virus capsids, icosahedral shells, optimal packing, cost functions, basin-hopping
Viruses are perhaps the simplest natural organisms
capable of self-assembly, self-replication, and other
biological functions, always within a host living cell.
Their structure and behavior are encoded in the virion genetic
material (DNA or RNA), which is enclosed in a protein coatknown as a capsid. In most viruses, this capsid is approximately
icosahedral. The corresponding point group symmetries are I
andI
h, the latter having an inversion center of symmetry. Iis
the highest symmetry that a system composed of a ﬁnite
number of asymmetric constituent elements, such as proteins,
can have, and therefore represents the approximate symmetry
of icosahedral viral capsids at the atomic scale. However, when
the structure is coarse-grained, both Iand Ihsymmetries are
possible.
It is well-known that the icosahedral design has many
advantages, such as high stability, maximal storage capacity,
and minimal information coding requirements.1This informa-
tion simplicity has led to general principles to geometrically
classify icosahedral capsids. Among these rules, the quasi-
equivalence principle of Caspar and Klug (CK)2laid the
foundations for modern structural virology. These authors
proposed a geometrical model of the capsid in terms of
repeating subunits (capsomers, both pentamers and hexam-
ers), by folding a 2D hexagonal lattice, where the sites areidenti ﬁed by a pair of non-negative integers ( hand k). The
resulting icosahedral shell is made of 20 equilateral triangular
faces, whose area, expressed in units of the smallest
icosahedron that can be built, is given by the triangulation
number T=h2+k2+kh. Thus, the possible values for Tare
discretized, i.e., T = 1, 3, 4, 7, ..., and are used as a structural
classiﬁcation for most icosahedral viruses. Within this scheme,
an icosahedral shell with triangulation number Tcomprises 12
pentamers and 10( T−1) hexamers, yielding a total of 10 T+2
capsomers and 60 Tcapsid proteins. The 12 pentamers
correspond to the 12 dislocations required to form a convex
icosahedral cage. These r ules have been adapted to
accommodate prolate nonicosahedral capsids.3−6
Generalizations of CK geome trical construction have
recently been provided to account for other anomalous
icosahedral viral structures.7,8By applying the CK construction
to the other three 2D Archimedean hexagonal lattices, namely
Received: June 10, 2021
Published: September 7, 2021
Article
www.acsnano.org
© 2021 American Chemical Society
14873https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.1c04952
ACS Nano 2021, 15, 14873 −14884
Downloaded via 123.101.241.29 on January 31, 2026 at 04:08:19 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

trihexagonal, snub hexagonal, and rhombitrihexagonal and
their duals, Twarock and Luque8were able to represent
anomalous capsid architectures. These structures combinemajor and minor coat proteins to produce totals excluded bythe CK construction. Viruses in the HK97 lineage provideexamples of this construction from the trihexagonal lattice.
This scheme provides an explanation for alternative capsid
layouts with identical stoichiometry in other viral lineages.However, examples corresponding to the regular rhombitrihex-agonal and snub hexagonal lattices are currently unknown.
8
The scheme of Rochal and co-workers7uses the same CK
map from the 2D hexagonal lattice onto the icosahedron and
deﬁnes a corresponding spherical lattice, which is denoted as
⟨h,k⟩in terms of the CK indices. The protein positions in the
planar structure are chosen by analyzing compatibility with thespherical lattice positions, which may be di ﬀerent from those
chosen in the original CK model. Speci ﬁcally, the nodes in the
icosahedral spherical lattice are classi ﬁed according to their
local symmetry as trivial (a multiple of 60), 2-fold (just 30), 5-fold (just 12), and 3-fold (just 20), respectively. Proteins, asasymmetric units, can only be assigned to trivial nodes withoutlocal symmetry. Symmetric nodes require compatible sym-
metric subunits made of several proteins. This model adds
other capsid structures to those provided by the CK model.The approach can also be used to account for complex double-shelled capsids by introducing a notion of commensurabil-ity.
7,9−12The Landau theory of crystallization applied to
spherical icosahedral lattices in a previous publication byLorman and Rochal9was also considered for the anomalous
structures. This scheme uses an expansion of the criticaldensity deviation in a reduced basis set of spherical harmonicsadapted to the icosahedral symmetry (icosahedral harmonics).
Further details of all these geometrical construction schemes
are summarized and analyzed in recent reviews by Zandi et
al.
13and S ̌iber.14
The 2D hexagonal lattice is ubiquitous in Nature, exhibiting
maximal symmetry, optimal packing, and optimal covering. A
functional of any of these properties may be designed so that,
when minimized, it will provide as its target the hexagonalpacking. In this work, we will refer to such functionals asdesign or cost functions. Hence, cost functions whose targetsare the 2D hexagonal lattice are the simplest ones to de ﬁne for
periodic structures in two dimensions. On the other hand, 2Dpackings, such as square close-packing, will require morecomplex designs. This situation highlights a direct relationshipbetween the complexity of the cost function and the relativeabundance of their targets in nature. The present contribution
extends this idea to icosahedral viral capsids. We will design
cost functions whose targets are the structures observed inknown viral capsids. Each target structure will be reproducedas the global minimum of the corresponding cost function.These functions must satisfy the principle of minimalcomplexity, i.e., minimal information requirements in the
mathematical formulation. The diversity of icosahedral capsidsthen leads to a variety of minimal cost functions. The relativecomplexity of these functions contains relevant physicalinformation about the corresponding capsid architectures.
The long-range order that underpins the designs must be
encoded in the relatively (at the virion scale) short-rangemolecular interactions that drive the self-assembly of suchordered structures. There are many examples in theoreticalvirology that demonstrate a direct connection between order inthe target structures and the minimal information required todesign short-range models for the interaction between coarse-
grained capsid subunits, which reproduce the target geo-metries.
4,6,15−50Hence, an important connection can be made
between the complexity of the minimal cost functions and theessential components of the interaction potential required tosupport these target structures, preferably as global minima on
the energy landscape. Some examples that illustrate this
connection will be provided in this work.
Another relevant connection may be made between the
complexity of cost functions and the relative abundance of thecorresponding target structures in Nature: an increase incomplexity corresponds to a lower probability of self-assembly
for the target structure. The relative abundance of T= 3 and
T= 4 structures and other observations will illustrate this
connection.
The targets of our cost functions will correspond to
particular distributions of given numbers of building blockson a spherical surface. The building blocks can be structured or
point particles. The CK construction scheme and the
generalizations discussed above fold the 2D hexagonal latticeonto the icosahedral shells, providing optimal covering andpacking. Optimal packings, coverings, and maximal convex-hullvolumes on the sphere correspond to well-de ﬁned classes of
optimization problem.
51Another way to distribute a ﬁxed
number of point particles Non a sphere can be derived from
the well-known Thomson problem.52,53In this case, the cost
function corresponds to the electrostatic potential energy whena unit charge is associated with each particle. After scaling, thiscost function has no adjustable parameters and, therefore,
represents a scheme with minimal information requirements
and thus minimal complexity. When compared with the otherthree optimization problems on the sphere, the Thomsonproblem is the one that provides the most icosahedralpackings. This situation occurs for N= 12, 32, 72, 122, 132,
192, 212, 272, ...,
54−56and the minimal cost structures, when
these numbers refer to capsomers, correspond to icosahedralviral capsids with T= 1, 3, 7, 12, 13, 19, 21, 27, ..., respectively.
Therefore, these capsids can be classi ﬁed straightforwardly at
the capsomer coarse-graining scale. There are missing Tvalues,
namely T= 4, 9, 16, 25, 28, .... Furthermore, if particles are
meant to represent single proteins, the Thomson problem failsto provide the right structures.
Our design generalizes the Thomson form to increase its
predictive power and to account for more complex icosahedralstructures. The symmetry constraint is incorporated through
interaction of the particles with an external ﬁeld, which is
expanded in the symmetry adapted basis set of icosahedralharmonics (IH).
57The smaller the number of basis functions
required to produce a given structure, the lower is itsinformation content and complexity. The general form canalso account for the structure of double-shell capsids andcapsids with protruding decorations. Interestingly, complexitycan be reduced by a suitable choice for the building blocksdistributed on the sphere and thus depends on the coarse-grained scale applied, with monomers, dimers, trimers,
pentamers, or hexamers as possible choices. Moreover, these
building blocks can be holes instead of particles. Once the
required terms and particle types are included in the costfunction and its parameters ﬁxed, the positions are optimized
toﬁnd the global minimum.
Cost functions can be designed to reproduce practically any
capsid structure, including those supported by the models of
Caspar and Klug,
2Twarock and Luque,8and Rochal and co-ACS Nano www.acsnano.org Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.1c04952
ACS Nano 2021, 15, 14873 −1488414874

workers,7,9−12along with many other anomalous structures.
Moreover, by increasing its complexity, the model allows ﬁner
control over the posit
