Applied Energy 343 (2023) 121219

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Applied Energy
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/apenergy

Green hydrogen production and use in low- and middle-income countries: A
least-cost geospatial modelling approach applied to Kenya
Leander A. Müller a , Alycia Leonard b ,∗, Philipp A. Trotter c,d , Stephanie Hirmer b
a

RWTH Aachen University, Templergraben 55, 52062 Aachen, Germany
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Parks Road, OX1 3PJ, UK
Schumpeter School of Business and Economics, University of Wuppertal, Gaußstraße 20, 42119 Wuppertal, Germany
d
Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 f3QY, UK
b
c

GRAPHICAL

ARTICLE

ABSTRACT

INFO

Keywords:
GIS
Green hydrogen
Renewable energy
Energy storage
Ammonia
LMIC

ABSTRACT
With the rising threat of climate change, green hydrogen is increasingly seen as the high-capacity energy
storage and transport medium of the future. This creates an opportunity for low- and middle-income countries
to leverage their high renewable energy potential to produce, use, and export low-cost green hydrogen, creating
environmental and economic development benefits. While identifying ideal locations for green hydrogen
production is critical for countries when defining their green hydrogen strategies, there has been a paucity of
adequate geospatial planning approaches suitable to low- and middle-income countries. It is essential for these
countries to identify green hydrogen production sites which match demand to expected use cases such that their
strategies are economically sustainable. This paper therefore develops a novel geospatial cost modelling method
to optimize the location of green hydrogen production across different use cases, with a focus on suitability
to low- and middle-income countries. This method is applied in Kenya to investigate the potential hydrogen
supply chain for three use cases: ammonia-based fertilizer, freight transport, and export. We find hydrogen
production costs of e3.7–9.9/kgH2 are currently achievable across Kenya, depending on the production location
chosen. The cheapest production locations are identified to the south and south-east of Lake Turkana. We
show that ammonia produced in Kenya can be cost-competitive given the current energy crisis and that Kenya
could export hydrogen to Rotterdam with costs of e7/kgH2 , undercutting current market prices regardless of
the carrier medium. With expected techno-economic improvements, hydrogen production costs across Kenya
could drop to e1.8–3.0/kgH2 by 2030.

∗ Corresponding author.

E-mail address: alycia.leonard@eng.ox.ac.uk (A. Leonard).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2023.121219
Received 9 December 2022; Received in revised form 6 March 2023; Accepted 24 April 2023
Available online 10 May 2023
0306-2619/© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Applied Energy 343 (2023) 121219

L.A. Müller et al.

1. Introduction

Homer for electrical system sizing [16]. However, these are designed
primarily to evaluate a set of given or heuristically determined hydrogen production sites, and not over a whole region. Khan et al.’s
integrated green hydrogen evaluation tool [17] presents a more general
and open-source approach to evaluate green hydrogen production
opportunities, but analyses this for particular zones of interest only
(i.e., not uniformly across a geography) and is tailored to the context
of Australia. The complexity of factors to consider for geospatial
identification and planning of green hydrogen infrastructure imply the
utility of geographical information systems (GIS) for exact location
planning [18,19]. This allows to evaluate land suitability for green
hydrogen production uniformly across a region, as in Messaoudi et al.’s
work in Algeria [20] and Soha et al.’s work in Hungary [21]. However,
GIS analyses are not limited to land considerations, but can also allow
planners to conduct supra-regional cost analyses which evaluate different supply and demand centres while considering relevant geographic
constraints. Early efforts towards geospatial hydrogen planning exist in
the literature, including Gupta et al.’s assessment of levelized costs of
hydrogen in Switzerland [22], Tlili et al.’s assessment of transport and
supply chains in France [23], and work by La Guardia et al. [24,25] and
Guzzini et al. [26] assessing levelized costs of hydrogen in Italy. These
site-specific GIS assessments often only consider a small set of discrete
geospatial locations without ability to extend to other geographies, or
cover only one stage of the hydrogen production process (e.g., neglecting demand centres or use-case-specific costs). One study which does
cover more of these options is Mah et al.’s framework and application in
Malaysia, which considers hydrogen transport methods of compressed
gas, cryogenic liquid, or LOHC [27]. However, this work focuses on
optimizing the entire hydrogen electricity supply chain instead of identifying specific feasible projects, and only considers hydrogen supplied
by solar photovoltaics. A generalizable and geospatially-explicit cost
modelling framework using multiple renewable energy generation options, which allows for application in multiple geographies, use-cases,
and transport options is therefore needed.
On gap (2): While integrating green hydrogen supply and demand
modelling has been argued to be critical for optimally planning transitions towards green hydrogen [28,29], the extant quantitative planning
literature has either not integrated demand options [20,22,30], or
tailored them to one specific use-case. For instance, Tabandeh’s analysis focusing on hydrogen refuelling stations (HRS) [31], Tlili et al.’s
research on green hydrogen in the transport sector [23], or Samsatli’s
work on hydrogen in heating [32] are limited to a specific use case
of hydrogen. The H2 Atlas produced by Forschungszentrum Jülich provides an accessible online GIS for hydrogen planning in West Africa, but
only considers supply-side constraints [33]. Where more detailed consideration of economic and demand-side factors are taken into account,
such as in the Hydrogen Financial Analysis Scenario Tool (H2FAST)
from the United States National Renewable Energy Laboratory, geographic factors and existing infrastructures are not considered [34].
However, given the different economic constraints for each hydrogen
use case, a framework that allows the consideration of different use
cases is required.
On gap (3): Existing peer-reviewed research on green hydrogen
infrastructure exhibits a considerable bias towards European countries [23,30,35] as well as cases in Asia [28,36,37]. Similarly to conventional energy systems planning work [38], there is a paucity of
research addressing low-income countries in general, and specifically
the sub-Saharan African region [8]. This is despite the fact that the
International Renewable Energy Agency estimates that sub-Saharan
Africa has the largest regional potential to produce green hydrogen for
under 1.5 USD/kg by 2050, with 30 times higher potential than all of
Europe [7]. Where cases in Africa have been discussed in the literature,
they have focused mainly on macro-level analysis, such as the recent
work by AbouSeada and Hatem [39] as well as the work by Oyewo
et al. on continental Africa [40] and by Bhandari on Niger [29].

The aim of this paper is to identify least-cost locations for the
production of green hydrogen across varying use cases in a low- and
middle-income country setting. We develop a novel spatial modelling
method for the cost of green hydrogen along the entire supply chain,
and we apply it to Kenya for use cases of ammonia production, freight
transport, and export.
With the rising threat of climate change, efforts towards developing
sustainable energy systems have gained momentum in recent years [1].
Renewable energy sources (RES), such as wind, solar, geothermal, and
hydropower, have caught up with, and in many cases overtaken, conventional power generation technologies in terms of levelized cost of
electricity. Indeed, they already make up significant shares of total electricity production in some regions such as Norway and Costa Rica [2].
However, RES generation technologies alone will not be able to fully
transform total final energy consumption [3,4]. To overcome the intermittency and volatility of RES, storage solutions are needed. Alongside
traditional high-capacity energy storage, climate-neutral energy carriers are required to decarbonize sectors where electrical energy and
batteries are reaching their operational limits. For these reasons, hydrogen has generated high interest in recent years [4,5]. The possibility of
climate-neutral hydrogen production via electrolysis using RES (known
as green hydrogen), and the subsequent opportunity to utilize it in
cross-sectoral applications as a chemical or energetic feedstock, make
it a promising and sustainable energy solution.
While high-income countries are leading green hydrogen technology development and activities, low- and middle-income countries
(LMICs) are increasingly interested in this field [6,7]. By producing
green hydrogen domestically using their abundant RES (e.g., as exist
in many African countries [6]), LMICs could meet domestic development goals by strengthening their own economies, increasing energy
sovereignty, and becoming net energy exporters [7,8]. Care in such
developments is needed, due to the risk of a renewable-based resource
curse [9]. However, if governed well by institutions with incentives to
ensure widespread benefits for the population [10], hydrogen production presents an opportunity for climate-compatible economic growth
in LMICs.
1.1. Green hydrogen location planning background
To advance the planning of hydrogen projects, the best geospatial locations for its production and use must be identified based on
economic, infrastructural, geological, demographic and resource endowment factors1 [12]. While a quickly growing literature has emerged
focusing on green hydrogen infrastructure, extant research exhibits
three critical knowledge gaps, namely concerning: (1) finding adequate geospatially explicit opportunities for green hydrogen production
plants at different scales; (2) integrating different supply points with
different demand options for green hydrogen; and (3) identifying applications tailored towards low- and middle-income countries with high
renewable energy potential. The scope of each of these gaps is outlined
below within the extant literature.
On gap (1): While predominant mathematical optimization approaches for location planning of green hydrogen produce system-wide
optimal solutions for hydrogen production networks [13], they are
usually too computationally expensive to identify exact geospatial
locations of low-cost green hydrogen production [14]. A number of
multi-criteria decision making (MCDM) models have been developed,
such as Abdel-Basset’s framework for deciding between hydrogen production options [15] or Rezaei’s fuzzy MCDM approach for evaluating
developing capital cities as hydrogen production sites, which then uses

1
It is worth noting that location-based plans must also be accompanied by
a robust political and regulatory framework [11].

2

Applied Energy 343 (2023) 121219

L.A. Müller et al.

There is therefore a clear gap for a generalizable GIS-based green
hydrogen production siting framework, which can be applied across
different geographies and use cases, and which takes both supply
and demand side techno-economic and geographic considerations into
account.
1.2. Novelty of this study
To fill the three gaps discussed above, to the best of our knowledge,
our study features the following three key novel features:
• Our generalizable and geospatially explicit model allows to identify least-cost green hydrogen production locations. An important
and novel feature in the realm of GIS-based green hydrogen
planning is its usage of H3 hexagons as areas of analysis [41].
As hexagons fill space optimally and are equidistant from their
neighbours [42], this allows to apply the model to different scales
(e.g., sub-national or continental) without requiring significant
changes to the model. This is a key feature given the importance
of green hydrogen infrastructure planning on a local and global
scale [7].
• The geospatial planning model integrates hydrogen supply locations with different domestic and export-oriented use cases. The
literature has demonstrated efficiency gains of integrated supply
and demand planning of green hydrogen [23,31]. However, our
work is the first to perform geospatially explicit green hydrogen
system analyses for different types of domestic and foreign use
cases as well as high-resolution supply options.
• Our study is the first peer-reviewed work to explicitly consider
geospatial green hydrogen infrastructure siting in an LMIC. Our
choice of Kenya underlines the relevance of such studies given
Kenya’s excellent renewable energy potential, comparably low
cost of capital, and the country’s efforts to introduce green hydrogen technologies domestically [43,44]. Our study responds to
recent research calling for more country-specific studies in Africa
to define robust energy transition pathways [8]. While Kenya
is investigated here, the developed methodology can be used to
analyse different country and regional cases. It is intended for use
as a tool to analyse green hydrogen opportunities and demand
cases in any country to support decision-making processes for
high-level planning or policy development.

Fig. 1. Summary of the spatial hydrogen cost modelling method.

framework. This allows the identification of the least-cost supply location for any use case. In this model, use cases are defined in terms
of the required state of the hydrogen needed, the quantity required,
and the demand location. They could include hydrogen demands such
as, for example, fertilizer production, long-term energy storage, or
steel manufacture, among many others [45]. By determining the leastcost option for every supply chain step, holistic hydrogen costs at any
selected demand centre are determined a least-cost production location
is selected.
This method exclusively models the value chain of green hydrogen
(i.e., produced via electrolysis with RES), as producing hydrogen in
this way promotes both sustainability and international economic independence. Two renewable energy technologies are studied as means to
generate the required electricity for production: newly constructed solar photovoltaics (PV), or onshore wind plants. These two technologies
are, along with hydropower, the cheapest RES, and unlike hydropower,
they are relatively quick and capital-efficient to set up [46].
The total cost of hydrogen from any particular supply location to
any particular demand location is modelled as a sum of the following
costs:

The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 introduces the geospatial hydrogen cost optimization method. The full
model implementation is available on GitHub: https://github.com/
leandermue/GEOH2. Then, Section 3 presents the results of applying
this method in Kenya, including spatial levelized costs of hydrogen
(Section 3.1) and least-cost production locations for three potential hydrogen applications (Section 3.2). These results are compared to current
market prices and conditions and discussed in the context of future
techno-economic improvements in Section 4. Finally, conclusions are
offered in Section 5.

𝑐 = 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻 + 𝑐𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 + 𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡 + 𝑐𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 + 𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑓 𝑟𝑎𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑡𝑢𝑟𝑒

(1)

where each 𝑐 represents a different cost component as indicated by
the subscript. Each of these costs is discussed in further detail in the
following subsections.

2. Methods
A spatial cost modelling method is developed to find least-cost locations of potential green hydrogen production to match any specified
demand or use case. The components of this model are illustrated
in Fig. 1. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first model specifically
designed to spatially calculate the total cost of meeting hydrogen
demand – from power generation to hydrogen production, conversion,
and delivery – considering different end-use cases along the entire supply
chain using techno-economic, geological and resource endowment input
data.
Costs are calculated for each possible production site (i.e., each
spatial sub-segment of the entire area of interest) using a GIS-based

2.1. Electricity generation
Electricity is required to produce green hydrogen. The levelized
costs of energy (𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸) for this are calculated as:
∑𝑛 𝐶𝐴𝑃 𝐸𝑋 𝑡 +𝑂𝑃 𝐸𝑋 𝑡 +𝐹𝑡
𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸 =

𝑡=1

(1+𝑟)𝑡
𝐸𝑡
𝑡=1 (1+𝑟)𝑡

∑𝑛

(2)

where 𝐶𝐴𝑃 𝐸𝑋 represents capital expenditures, 𝑂𝑃 𝐸𝑋 represents operational expenditures, 𝐹 represents fuel expenditures, 𝐸 represents
3

Applied Energy 343 (2023) 121219

L.A. Müller et al.

electricity generation, 𝑟 represents the discount rate, and 𝑛 represents
the lifetime of the system in years. Values with the subscript 𝑡 are
relevant to the year 𝑡. We assume no fuel input is required for PV
and wind generation plants, so 𝐹𝑡 is set to zero. The discount rate is
assumed to be constant over the time horizon. 𝐶𝐴𝑃 𝐸𝑋𝑡 and 𝑂𝑃 𝐸𝑋𝑡
are calculated as an annual payment per power capacity (kW) and the
generated electricity is assumed to be unchanged over the lifetime of
the system. This simplifies the calculation to:
𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸 =

𝐶𝐴𝑃 𝐸𝑋
+ 𝑂𝑃 𝐸𝑋
𝑃𝑉 𝐹

where 𝑐𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘 represents the cost of stack replacement, 𝐹 𝐿𝐻 represents
the full load hours of system, 𝜂𝑒𝑙𝑦 represents the electrolysis system
efficiency, 𝑤H2 represents gravimetric energy density, 𝑣H2 O represents
the volume of water, and 𝑐H2 O represents water costs. These water costs
are calculated as:
𝑐H2 O = 𝑐H2 O𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐 + 𝑐H2 O𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡 + 𝐸H2 O ⋅ 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸

where 𝑐H2 0𝑠𝑝𝑒𝑐 represents specific water costs, 𝑐H2 0𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡 represents water transport costs, and 𝐸H2 O represents water purification energy
demand. For both 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸 and water costs, the cheapest value in each
production location is chosen. Water can be drawn from a water body,
water way, or the ocean — if the ocean is selected, desalination is taken
into account. 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻 is calculated in e/kgH2 .
The electrolysis system is always scaled in such a way that the
minimum of 5,000 h in case of wind electricity production shall be full
load hours. Therefore, the electrolysis power installation is not 1:1 to
the wind power installed, but designed smaller to ensure that it runs
on a base power and thus it does not have to deal with the instability
of the renewable energy sources.

(3)

𝐸
𝑡

) with
where 𝑃 𝑉 𝐹 represents the present value factor (𝑃 𝑉 𝐹 = (1+𝑖) 𝑡−1
(1+𝑖) ⋅𝑖
interest rate 𝑖 assumed to be 8% for all equipment [47].
Electricity generation is estimated using spatial data for PV potential
from the Global Solar Atlas [48] and mean wind speed at a height
of 100 m from the Global Wind Atlas [49]. To determine the annual
generation from the PV systems, the average power potential data
per year (kWh/kWp/a) is taken. To calculate a similar energy index
(kWh/kW/a) for a wind turbine, an assumption had to be made about
the actual selected wind turbine and the wind distribution within a
year. The power output of a wind turbine can be calculated as:
𝜌
𝑃𝑡 =
⋅ 𝜋 ⋅ 𝑟2 ⋅ 𝑐 3 ⋅ 𝑐𝑝 ⋅ 𝜂𝑓 𝑖𝑒𝑙𝑑 ⋅ 𝜂𝑎𝑣𝑎𝑖𝑙
(4)
2
where 𝑃𝑡 represents the power output of the turbine (maximum at
nominal power), 𝜌 represents air density, 𝑟 represents rotor radius, 𝑐
represents wind speed, 𝑐𝑝 represents the power coefficient, 𝜂𝑓 𝑖𝑒𝑙𝑑 represents field efficiency, and 𝜂𝑎𝑣𝑎𝑖𝑙 represents availability. To represent
the wind distribution more realistically than an average value, the
Rayleigh distribution is used [50], which approximates the wind speed
probability density function 𝐹 (𝑣) based on the average wind speed as:
( )2
𝑣
− 𝐴

2.3. Conversion
Converting hydrogen to other forms can increase its volumetric energy content or alter its storage conditions and therefore allow a more
economical distribution process. In the developed model, conversion is
allowed both before and after transportation, as transporting hydrogen
in a different state than needed at the demand point can unlock
possible economically advantageous transport methods. The conversion
processes modelled here are compression to 500 bar, liquefaction, and
the transformation of hydrogen to ammonia (NH3 ) and liquid organic
hydrogen carriers (LOHC). Throughout this work, we consider the
LOHC carrier benzyltoluene.
Hydrogen after electrolysis is assumed to be a pressure of 25 bar
and a temperature of 298.15 K. The costs to convert hydrogen to other
forms are then calculated as:

(5)

𝐹 (𝑣) = 1 − 𝑒

where 𝑣 represents the wind speed and 𝐴 represents the scale parameter, defined as:
2
𝐴 = 𝑣𝑚 √
𝜋

(6)

𝐶𝐴𝑃 𝐸𝑋
+ 𝑂𝑃 𝐸𝑋 + 𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑡 ⋅ 𝐸ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑡 + 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸 ⋅ 𝐸𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐
(9)
𝑃𝑉 𝐹
where 𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑡 represents specific heat costs, 𝐸ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑡 represents thermal
energy demand, and 𝐸𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐 represents electricity demand. Losses of
hydrogen due to leakage or boil-off are neglected. Heat which is
released during conversion processes is assumed to not be monetized
and released without further processing.

𝑐𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 =

where 𝑣𝑚 represents the mean wind speed. After calculating the 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸
for both technologies, the least-cost technology is selected for each
potential production site. The exchange of electricity is allowed via
the existing electricity network; therefore, the lowest 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸 of all
sites connected to the grid is determined and defined as 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸 𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑑 .
If electricity is purchased via the grid, a fixed transmission fee (in
e/MWh) is charged. The most economic 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸 is selected for all
locations, and thus a decision is made between 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸𝑤𝑖𝑛𝑑 , 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸𝑃 𝑉 ,
and – in the case of a location connected to the grid – 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸 𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑑 for
each considered production location.

2.4. Transport
Two hydrogen transport options are considered: road transport
via trucks with trailers; and a pipeline system. All combinations of
hydrogen state and type of transport between supply and demand are
calculated and the most favourable economic option for distribution
is selected. This, for example, means that transport of ammonia is
permitted even if the demand scenario is for pure hydrogen. In this
example, costs would be incurred again at the demand centre for the
re-conversion back to pure hydrogen; these costs are integrated in the
optimization.
Road transport is modelled with the four hydrogen states previously
discussed: 500 bar, liquefied H2 , LOHC, and NH3 . Road transport costs
are calculated as:
𝐶𝐴𝑃 𝐸𝑋𝑣𝑒ℎ𝑖𝑐𝑙𝑒
𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑟𝑜𝑎𝑑 =
+ 𝑂𝑃 𝐸𝑋𝑣𝑒ℎ𝑖𝑐𝑙𝑒 + 𝑐𝐹 𝑢𝑒𝑙 + 𝑐𝑤𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑠
(10)
𝑃 𝑉 𝐹𝑣𝑒ℎ𝑖𝑐𝑙𝑒

2.2. Green hydrogen production
Green hydrogen production is modelled as undertaken through
water electrolysis, an endothermic chemical process which splits water (H2 O) into hydrogen (H2 ) and oxygen (O2 ) through the input of
electric energy as 2H2 O → 2H2 + O2 . This requires water, electricity,
and (depending on the technology) heat as inputs. As the processes
of alkaline and proton exchange membrane electrolysis do not need
thermal input energy, and are the two most developed technologies,
no heat requirements are assumed here [51]. Additionally, while the
resulting oxygen is not further investigated in this analysis, it could
potentially be captured and serve as an additional revenue stream.
The levelized cost of hydrogen (𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻) representing the total
specific hydrogen production cost is calculated as:
𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻 =

𝐶𝐴𝑃 𝐸𝑋+𝑐𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑘
+ 𝑂𝑃 𝐸𝑋
𝑃𝑉 𝐹
+ 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸
𝜂𝑒𝑙𝑦

𝐹 𝐿𝐻 ⋅ 𝑤

(𝑤
⋅

H2

𝜂𝑒𝑙𝑦

(8)

where 𝑣𝑒ℎ𝑖𝑐𝑙𝑒 ∈ {𝑇 𝑟𝑢𝑐𝑘𝑠, 𝑇 𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑙𝑒𝑟𝑠}, 𝑐𝑓 𝑢𝑒𝑙 represents the cost of fuel,
and 𝑐𝑤𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑠 represents the cost of wages.
Gaseous hydrogen can be transported via pipeline. The transformation into the desired state is in this case always modelled at the demand
site. Pipelines are divided into three subcategories: small (maximum

)
+ 𝑐H2 O ⋅ 𝑣H2 O (7)

H2

4

Applied Energy 343 (2023) 121219

L.A. Müller et al.

Table 1
Input data assigned to each geospatial hexagon, what the purpose of this specific data
is, and which geographical data set was used for it.

capacity 1.2 GW), medium (maximum capacity 4.7 GW), and large systems (maximum capacity 13 GW). For the sake of simplicity, the same
distance is chosen for the pipeline between a production and demand
location as the road distance between the two. Furthermore, only the
construction of new pipelines is considered. While retrofitting existing
pipelines could potentially be more economical, due to uncertainties
regarding their condition, the connected networks, and the state of
existing compressors, this option is not further investigated. Pipeline
transport costs are calculated as:
𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑝𝑖𝑝𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒 =

𝐶𝐴𝑃 𝐸𝑋𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑝
𝑃 𝑉 𝐹𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑝

+ 𝑂𝑃 𝐸𝑋𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑝 + 𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦

Input

Purpose

Source

PV potential

Determine electricity output of PV
modules.

Global Solar Atlas
[48]

Wind speed

Determine electricity output of
standardized wind turbine.

Global Wind Atlas
[49]

National grid

Calculate closest distance to grid to
determine electricity transmission
possibility and/or grid construction
costs.

OpenStreetMap
[52]

Road network

Calculate closest distance to road
network to determine road
availability and road construction
costs.

OpenStreetMap
[52]

Water supply

Calculate closest distance to water
bodies, ways and the ocean to
determine water costs.

OpenStreetMap
[52]

Quantity of
constructable
power plants

Estimation of theoretical achievable
power and hydrogen production
capacity.

‘‘Geospatial Land
Availability for
Energy Systems’’
model [53].

(11)

where 𝑒𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑝 ∈ {𝑃 𝑖𝑝𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒, 𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑠𝑜𝑟} and 𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦 represents electricity costs.
2.5. Storage
To be able to guarantee security of supply, a three-day storage facility is modelled by default. The storage at the production site is selected
to match the calculated least-cost transport technology. At the demand
centre, the storage is designed to accommodate the required hydrogen
state. If a pipeline is built, no storage is built on the production side,
as the pipeline itself can serve as storage. Storage costs are calculated
as:
𝐶𝐴𝑃 𝐸𝑋𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒
𝑐𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 =
(12)
𝑁𝑃 𝑉𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒

a set resolution of 5 are used. Each hexagon represents an average
area of 252.9 km2 . This resolution allows for a good initial assessment
of regional potentials and provides a low computational time. If a
coarser or finer resolution is desired, this can be changed when creating
the geographic input file and applied to the model without further
adjustments. Table 1 illustrates which input data are assigned to each
hexagon, what the purpose of this specific data is, and which data
source is used.

where 𝑁𝑃 𝑉𝑠𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑔𝑒 represents the net present value of the storage system.
2.6. Road and electricity infrastructure
This method allows the possibility to ‘‘construct’’ new road or electricity infrastructure and to see how this impacts hydrogen costs. New
electricity transmission lines can be modelled to connect production
locations to the existing network, potentially lowering 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑑 . They
can also be modelled to connect production locations close to demand
centres to the grid, making it possible to use cheaper electricity for
hydrogen production in geographically advantageous locations. New
roads can be modelled to allow road transport for locations which
are currently unreachable by road, where only transport via pipeline
systems would be possible at present.
The existence of a network (both road and grid) is represented with
a distance variable. If the corresponding network is running through a
hexagon, the distance variable is equal to 0. If however does not run
through a specific hexagon, the shortest distance between the central
point of this hexagon and the network is calculated. Based on this
distance the total construction costs are approximated. Infrastructure
costs are calculated as:
𝐶𝐴𝑃 𝐸𝑋𝑖𝑛𝑓 𝑟𝑎 + 𝑂𝑃 𝐸𝑋𝑖𝑛𝑓 𝑟𝑎
(13)
𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑓 𝑟𝑎 =
𝑁𝑃 𝑉𝑖𝑛𝑓 𝑟𝑎

3. Results
The spatial hydrogen cost modelling method described above is
applied in Kenya as an illustrative case study. Results are first presented
for 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻 across the whole country (i.e., without considering conversion to any other hydrogen state or transport costs). Then, results are
presented for three example demand cases: ammonia production for
fertilizer, freight transport, and export to Europe from Mombasa. Any
data inputs which are not already captured in Table 1 for these applications are outlined either in the sections below or in the Supplementary
Material.
3.1. LCOH across Kenya
𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻 is calculated across Kenya. First, 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸 is determined in
each hexagon, as shown in Fig. 2. PV electricity production costs show
minimal spatial variation; the production costs of wind show more
spatial variation. The 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸 from PV ranges between e80–120/MWh.
Electricity production from wind makes the most sense in northern
areas, where average wind speeds of up to 15 m/s are reached and
𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸 is around e30/MWh.
The 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻 is then calculated for each hexagon using the 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸
results. The full load hours of electrolysis are taken to be 3,000 h if powered via PV and 5,000 h if powered via wind based on annual duration
curves and capacity factors generated for Kenya; for a full justification,
please refer to the heading ‘‘Hydrogen production capacity’’ in the
Supplementary Materials. Results, shown in Table 2 and Fig. 3, indicate
that hydrogen production costs largely follow the pattern of the 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸.
In northern areas where wind energy can achieve low 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸, 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻
less than e4.0/kg can be achieved. Most areas, however, have 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻
of e6.0–8.0/kg and are primarily powered by solar PV.
The reason for the large range of 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻 and its close linkage
with 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸 is the high electricity demand of the electrolysis system

where 𝑂𝑃 𝐸𝑋𝑖𝑛𝑓 𝑟𝑎 is only modelled for road infrastructure and not for
electricity infrastructure.
2.7. Geospatial modelling
As previously discussed, the defined relationships are applied spatially across localized demand and supply centres. H3 hexagons [41]
are used as areas of analysis. These are distributed evenly across
the region of interest. Using H3 hexagons allows analysis at multiple
resolutions without requiring major model modifications. As hexagon
tiles regularly fill space optimally, and are equidistant from their
neighbours, modelling is simplified significantly compared to the use
of a square or otherwise shaped grid [42]. Each hexagon is assigned
spatial and socioeconomic input data which underlie all previously
described modelling. Following execution, results are assigned to each
hexagon and can be displayed and evaluated. Here, H3 Hexagons with
5

Applied Energy 343 (2023) 121219

L.A. Müller et al.
Table 2
Statistical summary of the levelized cost of hydrogen
in the base case.
Result

Base case value (e/kgH2 )

Minimum LCOH
Maximum LCOH
Median LCOH
Mean LCOH

3.655
9.912
8.351
7.893

Fig. 4. Cost components of minimum and maximum identified levelized cost of
hydrogen.

Table 3
Median and mean levelized cost of hydrogen with
transmission cost variation.
Transmission cost
(e/MWh)

Median LCOH
(e/kgH2 )

Mean LCOH
(e/kgH2 )

10
20
30
40
50
60

8.218
8.218
8.218
8.218
8.218
8.218

7.442
7.511
7.580
7.648
7.716
7.822

they make up e6.76/kgH2 or 69% of total costs at the most expensive
location. Both water costs and the OPEX of the electrolysis system do
not have a significant impact on the total 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻, even though the
water costs include purchase, energy costs for purification, and the
transport to the production site.

Fig. 2. Achievable levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) in Kenya based on analysis of
wind and solar photovoltaic technologies.

Hexagons connected to the grid are allowed to purchase electricity
from other connected hexagons, incurring transmission costs. Fig. 5
shows 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻 accounting for grid connection, with transmission costs
of e30/MWh. The grid exchange can be clearly seen here: the hexagons
connected to the grid receive the most favourable 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸 that exists
across the network, and thus they also have the same 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻. The transmission cost parameter is varied in the range e10–60/MWh, producing
the results shown in Table 3. While all of these scenarios show the
same minimum and maximum 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻 as the base case, the median and
mean values are slightly below the base case. Although no significant
cost reductions can be achieved in all regions, it is possible to achieve
lower 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻 in regions that are connected to the grid (compare Fig. 3
with Fig. 5). As these regions are usually also economic centres, and
therefore also potential bulk hydrogen consumers, this can reduce the
total costs of hydrogen, as distribution is often less costly with shorter
transport distances.

Fig. 3. Resulting levelized costs of hydrogen (LCOH) for hydrogen produced locally in
each hexagon.

The construction of new transmission lines is also considered. Here,
the grid is considered exclusively for the transport of electricity for
hydrogen production, and thus the entire costs for this are also taken
into account and offset against the 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻. The results indicate that
it is favourable to few hexagons construct new transmission lines, and
to do so brings only a small cost advantage. We find that hydrogen
production costs along the connected grid can be reduced by a further
e0.34/kg by the construction of new lines. This cost reduction is
achieved despite the high CAPEX of the transmission line and the
unrealistic consideration that it is used exclusively to enable hydrogen
production and not for electrification, integration of new electricity
sources, stabilization and efficiency increase.

considered. Considering an electrolysis system efficiency of 59% as
per [51] (taking the lower heating value of hydrogen) the electricity
input amounts to approximately 56.5 kWh/kgH2 . This is also highlighted in Fig. 4, which illustrates the cost components of the 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻
for the hexagons with the lowest and highest 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻 values. While the
electrolysis costs vary with the full load hours (i.e., 3,000 for areas
using PV generation and 5,000 for areas using wind generation), the
main cost gap can be traced back to the electricity costs. While in the
cheapest location these amount to e1.76/kgH2 or 48% of total costs,
6

Applied Energy 343 (2023) 121219

L.A. Müller et al.

3.2.2. Freight transport
Hydrogen fuel cell (FC) trucks could be used along Kenya’s northern
corridor for freight transport. This would require a HRS network, as
modelled in this use case. The northern corridor is an important trade
route in Kenya, connecting the port of Mombasa with Kenyan and East
African economic hubs.
In 2017, there were 13,070 HGV in Kenya’s national fleet, each
with an average annual millage of 63,205 km [58]. This demand case
assumes that 50% of the heavy good vehicles (HGV) in Kenya are
utilized along this route, as the route goes through regions which cover
approximately 50% of Kenya’s GDP [59]. We therefore model that 50%
of HGVs could therefore be substituted by FC trucks. This fleet segment
would drive approximately 413 million km per year. We model that
an average of 9 kgH2 /100 km is consumed based on a typical average
consumption of 8 kg/100 km [60] and an additional 1 kg/100 km
to account for poor road conditions. This therefore represents a total
hydrogen demand of 37.2 kt [61,62]. This H2 would need to be spread
across HRS along the northern corridor, spanning from Mombasa to
Busia. Large filling stations typically have a maximum capacity of
3,000–5,000 kg/day [63,64]; 3,000 kg/day stations are assumed here.
If an equally distributed HRS network of 3,000 kg/day facilities is
built on the 973 km section of the northern corridor within Kenya, at
least 34 HRS would have to be constructed to meet freight demand.
This corresponds to one filling station every 30 km. It is assumed that
hydrogen demand is evenly distributed among the 34 filling stations.
Assuming a capacity utilization of about 75%, extra costs of about
e1.65/kg are included in the hydrogen price due to the CAPEX and
OPEX of the filling stations [64]. In most cases, stations store the
hydrogen pressurized at 500 bar temporarily before it is dispensed, and
therefore no storage costs are included in the hydrogen distribution.
This demand case is modelled in two ways:

Fig. 5. Levelized cost of hydrogen (LCOH) possible considering production in each
hexagon with inclusion of transmission lines and transmission costs of 30 e/MWh.

3.2. Evaluation of specific hydrogen demand application
Three potential use cases for hydrogen production in Kenya are
modelled: ammonia, freight transport, and export. These illustrate how
the developed model can be used to spatially couple supply and demand.
3.2.1. Ammonia
Hydrogen is a feedstock for ammonia, which is a key input for
several fertilizers. Most fertilizer used in Kenya is imported [54]; domestic production of green ammonia for fertilizer could therefore save
emissions, create new revenue streams, foster economic development,
and decrease international dependency.
In 2020, approximately 650 kt of ammonia-based fertilizers were
imported to Kenya [54]. Almost half of this is diammonium phosphate
(DAP), which has an input of 0.2 tNH3 /t𝐷𝐴𝑃 [55]. 23% is urea; 0.57 tNH3
of ammonia are needed to produce 1 t𝑢𝑟𝑒𝑎 fertilizer. 20% is nitrogen–
phosphorus–potassium-fertilizers (NPK). It is difficult to confirm the
ammonia input required in NPK, as the nitrogen share in these can
vary significantly and affects the amount of ammonia required. As an
assumption, 25% of ammonia input is considered (i.e., 0.25 tNH3 /t𝑁𝑃 𝐾 ).
Lastly, ammonia sulfate consists of approximately 0.256 tNH3 / t𝑓 𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑧𝑒𝑟
and is, with 3%, the smallest considered fertilizer share [56].
In total, the ammonia required to produce these fertilizers is approximately 195 kt/a. Hydrogen accounts for 17.8% of the mass of
ammonia, meaning that the amount of hydrogen required would therefore be approximately 35 kt/a. While this can be expected to grow in
the coming years based on population growth and increasing threats
to agricultural activities from climate change, which can be in part
remediated through inputs like fertilizer [57], the present estimated
value is used here. The demand for this use case is modelled in Nairobi,
given its status as Kenya’s main economic hub.
Fig. 6 shows the 100 cheapest ammonia production locations (a)
and most cost-effective production locations (b) to cover this demand.
Wind-intensive sites in the country’s north have an especially low
ammonium production cost of e0.87–0.88/kgNH3 . The most favourable
site has a theoretical hydrogen production capacity of more than 80
kt/a and can therefore supply the total demand of ammonia.
A breakdown of the total ammonia costs for the minimum cost
production location is shown in Fig. 7. In the cheapest production
location (shown in dark green in 6a), electricity is produced with wind
and transportation is via NH3 trailers.

1. by considering each filling station as a separate project, with
a unique demand and independent production and distribution;
and
2. by considering the whole set of filling stations as a unified
project, with a unified demand and optimized production and
distribution across all stations.
The distance to the individual demand locations is approximated with
the mean distance value across all HRS in the second (i.e., unified
project) case.
In both cases, the resulting least-cost production locations are in the
northern, windy part of Kenya (see Fig. 8). In the first analysis, three
hexagons are selected for production directly next to each other. In the
second analysis, only one hexagon is selected for production, due to the
sufficient production capacity available in the most favourable hexagon
to meet the unified demand.
While the least-cost production selected sites do not vary significantly based on whether the filling stations are considered as separate
or unified demands, the overall costs of the supply chain of hydrogen
do. The total costs in the case of each filling station as a separate project
varies between e5.4–6.3/kgH2 with an average value of e5.8/kgH2
and thus annual costs to meet the full hydrogen requirements total
e214.45 million. Conversely, when considering the fuelling stations as
one project with a unified demand, LCOH of e4.7/kg is achievable,
resulting in total costs of e173.93 million. A significant cost saving –
e40.52 million – can therefore be achieved through holistic planning,
due to economies of scale in the conversion and distribution process.
This is highlighted in Fig. 9, which compares the cost breakdown of
an average production site when HRS are considered as separate and
unified projects. Due to the linearity of investment costs assumed for
RES and electrolysis systems, the costs for hydrogen production are the
same. However, better utilization and possible specific cost reductions
of the conversion and distribution technologies bring the total costs of
production significantly lower when the stations are considered as a
unified project.
7

Applied Energy 343 (2023) 121219

L.A. Müller et al.

Fig. 6. Cheapest production sites in the ammonia use case, considering the demand being centred in Nairobi (e/kgNH3 ).

Table 4
Total costs of hydrogen production and transport to Mombasa depending
on the hydrogen shipping state and the annual export quantity.
Hydrogen shipping
state

Export quantity (kt/year)
1

10

100

1,000

Liquefied Hydrogen
Ammonia
LOHC

10.86
6.25
5.49

6.10
5.48
5.2

5.58
5.43
5.16

5.23
4.70
4.19

at high quantities. Based on these results, LOHC is the cheapest option
at any quantity. As in the previous demand cases, the most favourable
production sites are located in the northern, windy areas in Kenya.
The shipping route from Mombasa to Rotterdam is approximately
13,200 km long. It runs through the Arabian sea, along the Suez
Canal, through the Mediterranean Sea, and finally through the Strait
of Gibraltar up to the North Sea [65]. Costs incurred for shipping are
based on Johnston et al. [66], where a similar distance was considered.
In this study, several routes were investigated, including between Valparaíso to Rotterdam with a distance of approximately 13,800 km. The
cost of shipping liquefied hydrogen along this route was calculated at
e1.38/kgH2 , LOHC at e0.96/kgH2 and ammonia at e0.39/kgH2 ; these
figures are used here.
Depending on the distribution method at the import location, ammonium and LOHC may have to be converted back into pure hydrogen
upon import. Assuming electricity costs of e0.25/kWh based on the average at time of modelling [67] and heat costs of e0.06/kWh, these processes (without considering possible purification) cost approximately
e1.17/kg for ammonia and e1.14/kg for LOHC.
The total costs of hydrogen at the import site are shown in Fig. 10.
Regardless of the transport state chosen, the cost of pure hydrogen at
the Port of Rotterdam is around e7/kg.

Fig. 7. Breakdown of ammonia costs in the ammonia use case.

3.2.3. Export
Export is a mid- to long-term goal for green hydrogen in Kenya.
This use case looks at exporting three liquid carrier states of hydrogen;
liquefied H2 , LOHC, and ammonia. It considers exporting 100 kt/a from
the port of Mombasa to Rotterdam. The costs of hydrogen export can
be divided into three subcategories: (1) production and distribution
in the exporting country; (2) shipping and associated processes; and
(3) carrier handling, transformation, and distribution in the importing
country.
Table 4 illustrates the total costs of hydrogen production and transportation to the port of Mombasa, depending on the chosen hydrogen
shipping state and the annual export quantity. For all hydrogen states,
production and distribution become cheaper with increasing quantity.
In the case of liquefied H2 in particular, there is a large cost gap due to
the high specific investment costs of the liquefaction plant at low flow
rates. LOHC and ammonia offer similar costs and can undercut e5.0/kg

4. Discussion
This work finds 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻 of e3.7–9.9/kgH2 across Kenya, depending on the location chosen, with more than 50% of theoretical capacity lying below e5/kgH2 . Green hydrogen produced in
8

Applied Energy 343 (2023) 121219

L.A. Müller et al.

Fig. 8. Selection of production locations in the freight demand case.

Fig. 10. Total hydrogen costs for Mombasa–Rotterdam export demand case.
Fig. 9. Hydrogen cost breakdown to demand centre for the two freight shipping
analyses.

4.1. Ammonia

Kenya therefore appears to be competitive with international prices,
especially given current high electricity and gas prices due to the
Russian-war-induced fuel shortage.

The results of the first demand case indicate that Kenyan ammonia would be cost competitive in the current energy crisis,
and can remain competitive long-term if carbon pricing is introduced across the energy sector. Historically, the global market price
of anhydrous ammonia has largely fallen between e100–400/t [68].
However, as ammonia is currently largely produced via the steam
reforming process (also known as blue hydrogen), production costs and
thus also sales prices are highly dependent on gas prices. Due to the
substantial increase in gas prices and the sanctions imposed on Russia
(i.e., the world’s second-largest ammonia producer), purchase prices
have risen to up to e1,500/t [69]. As such, the ammonia costs at the

While the lowest-cost hydrogen production locations depend on the
use case considered, they tend to follow the same pattern as the lowest
𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸. This is particularly evident for higher hydrogen quantities, as
specific costs for conversion and transportation decrease. The cheapest
production locations in Kenya are therefore in the northern areas, to the
south-east and south of Lake Turkana, where constant high wind speeds
result in low 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸, indicated both by the overall 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻 results across
Kenya and in each of the demand cases modelled.
9

Applied Energy 343 (2023) 121219

L.A. Müller et al.
Table 5
Conventional ammonia production costs and break-even levelized
costs of hydrogen with varying carbon prices. Conventional
ammonia costs based on [70].

electric trucks, electric or FC trains) can also offer zero emission freight
transport, a feasibility study which takes all freight technologies into
account should be made before one is selected for subsidy.

Carbon price
(e/tCO2 )

Conventional NH3
cost (e/kgNH3 )

Break-even LCOH
(e/kgH2 )

4.3. Export

0
50
100
150
200

0.40
0.48
0.57
0.65
0.73

1.05
1.52
1.98
2.44
2.91

The results of the export case indicate the potential of Kenya
exporting green hydrogen to Rotterdam with total unit costs
of e7.0/kgH2 regardless of which carrier medium (liquefied H2 ,
LOHC, or NH3 ) is used, undercutting current market prices. To
realize this potential, Kenya would have to address two key points:
namely, to (1) conceive of approaches to capitalize on synergies between domestic and foreign usage of green hydrogen, and (2) to
build the required soft and hard infrastructure. Using international and
private investments to establish a local industry, for instance through
local content requirements like in South Africa’s renewable energy
sector [72], can catalyze the domestic industry if adequate distributive
mechanisms are implemented. Kenya is likely to have to move comparably quickly on this issue given the rapid establishment of strategic
green hydrogen partnerships [7] and comparably high shipment costs
due to its distance from future demand hubs (e.g., Europe, Japan, South
Korea).
Second, in order to realize its potential for export, Kenya would
have to ensure that both the required infrastructure for green hydrogen compression and shipment is built, and, critically, start to build
domestic skills in green hydrogen and its adjacent supplier industries [73]. With such a domestic skills offensive, technology transfer is
unlikely to occur and domestification of green hydrogen benefits will
be exacerbated [8]. International cooperation through public finance,
concessional loans and skills transfer can help to de-risk investment in
infrastructure, and help establish and scale the required engineering
and social science education programmes in Kenya.

demand centre found here, at e870/t including production, conversion,
and distribution, show that NH3 produced in Kenya can already be
cost-competitive in the current energy crisis.
It cannot be assumed, however, that ammonia costs will remain
this high. For non-crisis situations, ammonia production costs using
conventional methods are estimated at e400/t in 2030 [70]. In the long
term, the cost competitiveness of Kenyan ammonia therefore depends
on carbon pricing. If no carbon price is introduced (i.e., a carbon price
of e0), Kenyan NH3 is likely to be significantly more expensive than the
market price. However, if a carbon price is introduced, this changes.
Table 5 shows the projected costs of ammonia using conventional
processes (i.e., using natural gas) and varying carbon emission prices
for the year 2030. The required 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻 in Kenya is calculated from this,
assuming that both conversion and distribution costs remain the same
over time. If a CO2 -price of e100/t is introduced, Kenyan ammonia
produced with an 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻 of around e2.0/kgH2 will be cost competitive,
and with CO2 -prices of e200/t, even ammonia produced with an
𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻 close to e3.0/kgH2 will be competitive. While this is still lower
than the lowest achievable 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻 we find in Kenya at the moment,
it is likely that 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻 will decrease below this by 2030, as will be
discussed in Section 4.4. As such, with a carbon price and anticipated
𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻 reductions, Kenyan ammonia could be competitive on the world
stage within the next decade.

4.4. Outlook for 2030
Renewable energy technologies are catching up with fossil fuels in
terms of costs through technology development, economies of scale, reduction in initial investment costs, and performance improvement [3].
Similar techno-economical improvements are also expected for hydrogen technologies [51].
The RES generation technologies considered for hydrogen production in this study (i.e., wind and solar PV) experienced significant price
drops in the last few decades. Between 2010–2021, the total installed
costs for onshore wind projects dropped on average by 4% annually,
and solar PV achieved a total installed cost reduction of 14% per
year [3]. If PV and onshore wind projects in Kenya follow the same
trend in upcoming years, CAPEX for wind projects could land at around
e1,100/kW in 2030, and those of PV around e377/kWp.
Major improvements are also expected in terms of electrolysis system efficiency and investment costs. IRENA expects the CAPEX of
these electrolysis technologies to be below e200–300/kW by 2050.
Furthermore, increased output pressures are expected, which will reduce the required energy input for compression and increase system
efficiency to 74% and higher [51]. Other studies come to similar results
– for instance, a cost range of e444–730/kW, depending on chosen
technology (proton exchange membrane and alkaline) and plant size
(minimum 5 MW, maximum 100 MW) is forecast in 2030, with system
efficiencies of up to 70% [74]. Therefore, a CAPEX of e600/kW can
be realistically predicted. This translates to a halving of costs by 2030.
This 50% decrease is also applied to the stack exchange costs.
If these techno-economic improvements can be achieved (i.e., 50%
cost reduction and 74% efficiency), hydrogen production costs across
Kenya could drop to e1.8–3.0/kgH2 by 2030. Most production locations
would choose PV as a generation technology; however, the cheapest
production locations still use wind power for electricity generation.

4.2. Freight transport
The results of the second demand case show that hydrogen-based
freight transport is a less promising application in Kenya. It is difficult for hydrogen-based freight to be cost competitive, particularly due
to high vehicle and infrastructure CAPEX compared to the conventional
alternative, diesel trucks.
Fuel costs for hydrogen FC trucks are higher than for the diesel
fuelled alternative. This analysis assumed 9.0 kgH2 /100 km is consumed by FC HGVs, while equivalent diesel trucks consume about 36.0
L/100 km [62]. We find average hydrogen costs of e5.8/kgH2 , resulting
in a fuel cost of e52.2/100 km. Meanwhile, diesel costs e1.1/L in
Kenya [71], resulting in a total fuel cost of e39.6/100 km.
While the difference in fuel costs for hydrogen FC and diesel trucks
is not so dramatic, the difference in CAPEX is, and is decisive in
the economics of operation. The CAPEX of current FC trucks lies
around e550,000–600,000, while diesel trucks can be purchased for
e100,000–150,000 [62]. Assuming a maximum annual driving distance
of 160,000 km/a and a life duration of 8 years, additional costs for FC
trucks compared to diesel trucks amount to approximately e35/100 km
due to the higher CAPEX.
The hydrogen price at the refuelling station required for competitive
operation, including the additional costs due to the CAPEX, is shown
in Table 6. FC trucks therefore cannot compete with diesel trucks
at present. Cost-competitive operation of hydrogen freight could be
achieved either by a significant increase in diesel prices, a reduction
in the cost of hydrogen at the refuelling station, and/or a significant
reduction in the investment costs of FC trucks. CAPEX reduction could
also be achieved through, among other things, government subsidies to
drive a technology push. However, as other technologies (e.g., battery
10

Applied Energy 343 (2023) 121219

L.A. Müller et al.
Table 6
Competitive hydrogen price for freight shipping with varying values of carbon and diesel prices, including CAPEX.
Carbon price
(e/tCO2 )

1.0

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

Diesel price (e/L)
1.5

1.6

1.7

1.8

1.9

2.0

0
50
100
150
200

−1.56
−1.03
−0.50
0.03
0.56

−1.16
−0.63
−0.10
0.43
0.96

−0.76
−0.23
0.30
0.83
1.36

−0.36
0.17
0.70
1.23
1.76

0.04
0.57
1.10
1.63
2.16

0.44
0.97
1.50
2.03
2.56

0.84
1.37
1.90
2.43
2.96

1.24
1.77
2.30
2.83
3.36

1.64
2.17
2.70
3.23
3.76

2.04
2.57
3.10
3.63
4.16

2.44
2.97
3.50
4.03
4.56

current market prices regardless of which carrier medium (liquefied
H2 , LOHC, or NH3 ) is used. Accounting for expected techno-economic
improvements in technology costs and electrolysis system efficiency,
hydrogen production costs across Kenya could drop to e1.8–3.0/kgH2
by 2030.

4.5. Future work
The model developed in this paper could be improved through
further work. While data quality regarding geospatial and investment
parameters has markedly improved in the last few years in Kenya and
Africa as a whole [7,12,47], there is still considerable uncertainty in
several cost parameters, such as transport of green hydrogen at scale
and both technology and finance cost developments in the future.
Stochastic approaches and further sensitivity analyses might be interesting approaches to account for this data uncertainty. Furthermore, the
current model implementation only allows one RES generation technology to be selected for use in hydrogen production in each geospatial
hexagon (i.e., PV or wind). This selection is presently made on the basis
of the 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸, and the joint construction of wind and PV technology is
not permitted. Research regarding the combination of wind and solar
plants for the production of hydrogen suggests that this can lead to
lower 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐻 overall, as the full load hours of the electrolysis plant
can be increased and thus the specific CAPEX per kg hydrogen can
be decreased [75]. Allowing for an optimized combination of PV and
wind in each geospatial H3 hexagon would improve the cost accuracy
in future work. Given the current model formulation, the cost estimates
made here are therefore conservative; it may be possible to lower
them with improved design of the generation sources used for green
hydrogen production which incorporate a combination of PV and wind
in each cell.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Leander A. Müller: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software,
Formal analysis, Data curation, Writing – original draft, Visualization.
Alycia Leonard: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing ,
Visualization, Project administration. Philipp A. Trotter: Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing, Supervision. Stephanie Hirmer:
Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project
administration.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
Links to all data sources are provided in supplementary material.
Code is available openly and linked in the article.

5. Conclusion
Acknowledgements
This paper has investigated the least-cost location of green hydrogen
production for varying use cases while balancing demand and supply.
To this end, a novel spatial hydrogen cost modelling method (available
on GitHub: https://github.com/leandermue/GEOH2) has been developed to allow the assessment of green hydrogen along the entire supply
chain in LMICs. This method was applied to Kenya as a case study, and
it was used to investigate three possible hydrogen production use cases:
ammonia production for fertilizer, hydrogen-based freight transport,
and hydrogen export from Mombasa to Rotterdam.
Results show hydrogen production costs across Kenya of e3.7–
9.9/kgH2 are currently achievable. Green hydrogen produced in Kenya
could therefore compete with international price ranges, especially
given current high electricity and gas prices due to the fuel shortage resulting from the Russian war. Least-cost locations to produce hydrogen
tend to follow the pattern of the 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸, especially when considering
higher hydrogen quantities, as specific costs for conversion and transportation decrease. The cheapest production locations are identified
in northern areas to the south and south-east of Lake Turkana, where
constant high wind speeds create low 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸.
We find that ammonia produced in Kenya could presently be costcompetitive given inflated energy prices due to the Russian war. Furthermore, with future technology improvements, cost reductions, and
potential carbon pricing interventions, Kenyan ammonia can remain
internationally competitive. Hydrogen-based freight road transport is
less likely to be competitive, particularly given the high CAPEX of
fuel cell trucks. Finally, for hydrogen export, we find that Kenya
could export green hydrogen to a port in Europe (in this analysis
Rotterdam) with total costs amounting to e7.0/kgH2 , undercutting

This material has been produced with support from the Climate
Compatible Growth (CCG) programme, which brings together leading
research organizations and is led out of the STEER centre, Loughborough University. CCG is funded by UK aid from the UK government.
However, the views expressed herein do not necessarily reflect the
UK government’s official policies. Many thanks to Simon Patterson for
assistance in copy-editing.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary material related to this article can be found online
at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2023.121219.
References
[1] Griffiths S, Sovacool BK, Kim J, Bazilian M, Uratani JM. Industrial decarbonization via hydrogen: A critical and systematic review of developments,
socio-technical systems and policy options. Energy Res Soc Sci 2021;80:102208.
[2] Ritchie H, Roser M, Rosado P. Energy. Our World in Data 2022. https://
ourworldindata.org/energy.
[3] IRENA. Renewable Power Generation - Costs in 2021. Tech. rep., Abu Dhabi:
International Renewable Energy Agency; 2022, URL https://www.irena.org/
publications/2022/Jul/Renewable-Power-Generation-Costs-in-2021.
[4] IEA. Net Zero by 2050 - A Roadmap for the Global Energy Sector. Tech. rep.,
International Energy Agency; 2021, URL https://www.iea.org/reports/net-zeroby-2050.
[5] Guerra OJ, Zhang J, Eichman J, Denholm P, Kurtz J, Hodge B-M. The value
of seasonal energy storage technologies for the integration of wind and solar
power. Energy Environ Sci 2020;13(7):1909–22.
11

Applied Energy 343 (2023) 121219

L.A. Müller et al.

[33] Institute of Energy and Climate Research - Techno-Economic Systems Analysis
(IEK-3). H2 Atlas Africa. 2022, URL https://africa.h2atlas.de/ecowas.
[34] National Renewable Energy Laboratory. H2FAST: Hydrogen Financial Analysis
Scenario Tool. 2022, URL https://www.nrel.gov/hydrogen/h2fast.html.
[35] Maestre V, Ortiz A, Ortiz I. Transition to a low-carbon building stock. Technoeconomic and spatial optimization of renewables-hydrogen strategies in Spain. J
Energy Storage 2022;56:105889.
[36] Zhao H, Kamp LM, Lukszo Z. Exploring supply chain design and expansion
planning of China’s green ammonia production with an optimization-based
simulation approach. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2021;46(64):32331–49.
[37] Zhou Y, Li R, Lv Z, Liu J, Zhou H, Xu C. Green hydrogen: A promising way to
the carbon-free society. Chin J Chem Eng 2022.
[38] Trotter PA, McManus MC, Maconachie R. Electricity planning and implementation in sub-Saharan Africa: A systematic review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev
2017;74:1189–209.
[39] AbouSeada N, Hatem TM. Climate action: Prospects of green hydrogen in Africa.
Energy Rep 2022;8:3873–90.
[40] Oyewo AS, Bogdanov D, Aghahosseini A, Mensah TN, Breyer C. Contextualizing
the scope, scale, and speed of energy pathways toward sustainable development
in Africa. Iscience 2022;25(9):104965.
[41] Uber Technologies. H3 - Hexagonal hierarchical geospatial indexing system.
2022, URL https://h3geo.org.
[42] Arderne C. SPIDER. 2022, URL https://github.com/carderne/ccg-spider.
[43] IEA. Africa Energy Outlook 2019 - Overview: Kenya. Tech. rep., International
Energy Agency; 2019, URL https://www.iea.org/articles/kenya-energy-outlook.
[44] Ministry of Energy Kenya and Deutsche Gesellschaft für Zusammenarbeit (GIZ).
Baseline study on the potential for power-to-x / green hydrogen in Kenya. Tech.
rep., Kenya: Ministry of Energy Kenya; 2022.
[45] Collett K, Silva Ribeiro C, Hayer L, Müller L, Hirmer S. Green Hydrogen for
Development: An alternative to natural gas. Tech. rep., Climate Compatible
Growth Programme; 2022, URL https://climatecompatiblegrowth.com/greenhydrogen-for-development-an-alternative-to-natural-gas/.
[46] IRENA. Renewable power generation costs 2020. Tech. rep., Abu Dhabi:
International Renewable Energy Agency; 2021, URL https://www.irena.org/
publications/2021/Jun/Renewable-Power-Costs-in-2020.
[47] Agutu C, Egli F, Williams NJ, Schmidt TS, Steffen B. Accounting for finance in
electrification models for sub-Saharan Africa. Nat Energy 2022;1–11.
[48] The World Bank Group and Solargis and Energy Sector Management Assistance
Program (ESMAP). Global Solar Atlas. 2022, URL https://globalsolaratlas.info.
[49] Technical University of Denmark (DTU) and The World Bank Group and Vortex
and Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP). Global Wind Atlas.
2022, URL https://globalwindatlas.info.
[50] Heier S. Windkraftanlagen: Systemauslegung, Netzintegration und Regelung (5.
Ausg.). 2009.
[51] IRENA. Green hydrogen cost reduction scalling up electrolysers to meet the
1.5 ◦ C climate goal. Tech. rep., Abu Dhabi: International Renewable Energy
Agency; 2020, URL https://irena.org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/
2020/Dec/IRENA_Green_hydrogen_cost_2020.pdf.
[52] OpenStreetMap contributors. OpenStreetMap. 2022, URL https://www.
openstreetmap.org/.
[53] Ryberg DS, Robinius M, Stolten D. Evaluating land eligibility constraints of
renewable energy sources in Europe. Energies 2018;11(5):1246.
[54] AfricaFertilizerorg. Statistics – AfricaFertilizer.org. 2022, URL https:
//africafertilizer.org/statistics/.
[55] Mosaic Crop Nutrition. Diammonium phosphate. 2022, URL https://www.
cropnutrition.com/resource-library/diammonium-phosphate.
[56] Environment Agency Austria. Production of ammonia, nitiric acid, urea
and n-fertilizer. Tech. rep., Vienna: Umweltbundesamt; 2017, URL
https://www.umweltbundesamt.at/fileadmin/site/themen/industrie/ammonia_
nitric_acid_urea_and_fertiliser_installation2_production_.pdf.
[57] Mordor Intelligence. Fertilizers market size, overview, analysis, report 2022 27. 2022, URL https://www.mordorintelligence.com/industry-reports/fertilizersmarket.
[58] Notter B, Weber F, Füssler J, Eichhost U. Updated transport data in Kenya
2018 - An overview. Tech. rep., Gesellschaft für internationale Zusammenarbeit
(GIZ) ; 2019, URL https://www.changing-transport.org/wp-content/uploads/
2019_Updated-transport-data-in-Kenya.pdf.
[59] Kenya National Bureau of Statistics. Gross County Product (GCP) 2021. Tech.
rep., Nairobi: Kenya National Bureau of Statistics ; 2022, URL https://www.
knbs.or.ke/download/gross-county-product-gcp-2021/.
[60] Hyundai Motor Company. XCIENT Fuel Cell. 2022, URL https://trucknbus.
hyundai.com/global/en/products/truck/xcient-fuel-cell.
[61] Basma H, Rodríguez F. Fuel cell electric tractor-trailers: Technology overview
and fuel economy. Tech. rep., The International Council on Clean Transportation ; 2022, URL https://theicct.org/publication/fuel-cell-tractor-trailer-techfuel-jul22/.
[62] EMCEL Engineering Company for Fuel Cell, Hydrogen Technology and Electric
Mobility. Company hydrogen cost and usage data. 2022.
[63] Hydrogen Mobility Europe. Emerging conclusions 2021. Tech. rep., Element Energy; 2021, URL https://h2me.eu/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/H2ME_
Emerging-Conclusions2020.pdf.

[6] WEC. International Hydrogen Strategies. Tech. rep., World Energy Council;
2022, URL https://www.weltenergierat.de/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/WEC_
H2_Strategies_Executive-Summary_final.pdf.
[7] IRENA. Geopolitics of the energy transformation: the hydrogen factor. Tech.
rep., Abu Dhabi: International Renewable Energy Agency; 2022, URL
https://www.irena.org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/Publication/2022/Jan/
IRENA_Geopolitics_Hydrogen_2022.pdf.
[8] Mulugetta Y, Sokona Y, Trotter PA, Fankhauser S, Omukuti J, Somavilla Croxatto L, et al. Africa needs context-relevant evidence to shape its clean energy
future. Nat Energy 2022;7(11):1015–22.
[9] Leonard A, Ahsan A, Charbonnier F, Hirmer S. The resource curse in renewable
energy: A framework for risk assessment. Energy Strategy Rev 2022;41:100841.
[10] Trotter PA. Rural electrification, electrification inequality and democratic
institutions in sub-Saharan Africa. Energy for Sustain Dev 2016;34:111–29.
[11] IEA. Global Hydrogen Review 2021. Tech. rep., International Energy Agency;
2021, URL https://www.iea.org/reports/global-hydrogen-review-2021.
[12] IRENA. Green Hydrogen: A guide to policy making. Tech. rep., Abu Dhabi:
International Renewable Energy Agency; 2022, URL https://www.irena.org/
publications/2020/Nov/Green-hydrogen.
[13] Alirahmi SM, Razmi AR, Arabkoohsar A. Comprehensive assessment and multiobjective optimization of a green concept based on a combination of hydrogen
and compressed air energy storage (CAES) systems. Renew Sustain Energy Rev
2021;142:110850.
[14] Galván A, Haas J, Moreno-Leiva S, Osorio-Aravena JC, Nowak W, Palma-Benke R,
et al. Exporting sunshine: Planning South America’s electricity transition with
green hydrogen. Appl Energy 2022;325:119569.
[15] Abdel-Basset M, Gamal A, Chakrabortty RK, Ryan MJ. Evaluation of sustainable
hydrogen production options using an advanced hybrid MCDM approach: A case
study. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2021;46(5):4567–91.
[16] Rezaei M, Khalilpour KR, Jahangiri M. Multi-criteria location identification for
wind/solar based hydrogen generation: The case of capital cities of a developing
country. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2020;45(58):33151–68.
[17] Khan MHA, Heywood P, Kuswara A, Daiyan R, MacGill I, Amal R. An integrated
framework of open-source tools for designing and evaluating green hydrogen
production opportunities. Commun Earth Environ 2022;3(1):309.
[18] Resch B, Sagl G, Törnros T, Bachmaier A, Eggers J-B, Herkel S, et al. GIS-based
planning and modeling for renewable energy: Challenges and future research
avenues. ISPRS Int J Geo-Inf 2014;3(2):662–92.
[19] Strachan N, Balta-Ozkan N, Joffe D, McGeevor K, Hughes N. Soft-linking
energy systems and GIS models to investigate spatial hydrogen infrastructure
development in a low-carbon UK energy system. Int J Hydrogen Energy
2009;34(2):642–57.
[20] Messaoudi D, Settou N, Negrou B, Settou B. GIS based multi-criteria decision
making for solar hydrogen production sites selection in Algeria. Int J Hydrogen
Energy 2019;44(60):31808–31.
[21] Soha T, Hartmann B. Complex power-to-gas plant site selection by multi-criteria
decision-making and GIS. Energy Convers Manag X 2022;13:100168.
[22] Gupta R, Rüdisüli M, Patel MK, Parra D. Smart power-to-gas deployment
strategies informed by spatially explicit cost and value models. Appl Energy
2022;327:120015.
[23] Tlili O, Mansilla C, Linßen J, Reuß M, Grube T, Robinius M, et al. Geospatial
modelling of the hydrogen infrastructure in France in order to identify the most
suited supply chains. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2020;45(4):3053–72.
[24] La Guardia M, D’Ippolito F, Cellura M. A GIS-based optimization model finalized
to the localization of new power-to-gas plants: The case study of Sicily (Italy).
Renew Energy 2022;197:828–35.
[25] La Guardia M, D’Ippolito F, Cellura M. Construction of a webgis tool based on a
gis semiautomated processing for the localization of p2g plants in sicily (Italy).
ISPRS Int J Geo-Inf 2021;10(10):671.
[26] Guzzini A, Brunaccini G, Aloisio D, Pellegrini M, Saccani C, Sergi F. A new
geographic information system (GIS) tool for hydrogen value chain planning
optimization: Application to Italian highways. Sustainability 2023;15(3):2080.
[27] Mah AXY, Ho WS, Hassim MH, Hashim H, Muis ZA, Ling GHT, et al. Spatial
optimization of photovoltaic-based hydrogen-electricity supply chain through
an integrated geographical information system and mathematical modeling
approach. Clean Technol Environ Policy 2022;1–20.
[28] Chu KH, Lim J, Mang JS, Hwang M-H. Evaluation of strategic directions for
supply and demand of green hydrogen in South Korea. Int J Hydrogen Energy
2021.
[29] Bhandari R. Green hydrogen production potential in West Africa–Case of Niger.
Renew Energy 2022;196:800–11.
[30] Kakoulaki G, Kougias I, Taylor N, Dolci F, Moya J, Jäger-Waldau A. Green
hydrogen in Europe–A regional assessment: Substituting existing production with
electrolysis powered by renewables. Energy Convers Manage 2021;228:113649.
[31] Tabandeh A, Hossain M, Li L. Integrated multi-stage and multi-zone distribution
network expansion planning with renewable energy sources and hydrogen
refuelling stations for fuel cell vehicles. Appl Energy 2022;319:119242.
[32] Samsatli S, Samsatli NJ. The role of renewable hydrogen and inter-seasonal
storage in decarbonising heat–comprehensive optimisation of future renewable
energy value chains. Appl Energy 2019;233:854–93.
12

Applied Energy 343 (2023) 121219

L.A. Müller et al.

[71] GlobalPetrolPricescom. Kenya diesel prices, 08-Aug-2022. 2022, URL https://
www.globalpetrolprices.com/Kenya/diesel_prices/.
[72] Alova G, Trotter PA, Money A. A machine-learning approach to predicting
Africa’s electricity mix based on planned power plants and their chances of
success. Nat Energy 2021;6(2):158–66.
[73] Mealy P, Teytelboym A. Economic complexity and the green economy. Res Policy
2020;103948.
[74] Holst M, Aschbrenner S, Voglstätter C, Grimm G. Cost Forecast for LowTemperature Electrolysis - Technology Driven Bottom-Up Prognosis for PEM
and Alkaline Water Electrolysis Systems. Tech. rep., Freiburg: Fraunhofer
Institute for Solar Energy Systems ISE ; 2021, URL https://www.ise.fraunhofer.
de/content/dam/ise/de/documents/publications/studies/cost-forecast-for-lowtemperature-electrolysis.pdf.
[75] Koenig H. Scaling up the hydrogen economy: Opportunities for renewables. Tech.
rep., 2022, URL https://www.solarify.eu/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/AuroraEnergy-Research_Scaling-up-the-hydrogen-economy_Opportunities-forRenewables.pdf.

[64] NewBusFuel. Hydrogen bus refuelling – Summary Report. Tech. rep., Fuel Cell
and Hydrogen Joint Undertaking; 2017, URL http://newbusfuel.eu/wp-content/
uploads/2015/09/NBF_SummaryReport_download.pdf.
[65] Sea Distance Calculator | ShipTraffic.net. 2001, URL http://www.shiptraffic.net/
2001/05/sea-distances-calculator.html.
[66] Johnston C, Khan MHA, Amal R, Daiyan R, MacGill I. Shipping the sunshine:
An open-source model for costing renewable hydrogen transport from Australia.
Int J Hydrogen Energy 2022;47(47):20362–77.
[67] Shah S. Stima Tracker - Electricity cost in Kenya . 2022, URL https://www.
stimatracker.com/.
[68] Schnitkey G. Anhydrous ammonia, corn, and natural gas prices over time. Farmdoc Daily 2016;6. URL https://farmdocdaily.illinois.edu/2016/06/anhydrousammonia-corn-and-natural-gas-prices.html.
[69] Schnitkey G, Paulson N, Zulauf C, Swanson K, Colussi J, Baltz J. Nitrogen
fertilizer prices and supply in light of the Ukraine-Russia conflict. Farmdoc Daily
2022;12(45).
[70] Hydrogen Council and McKinsey & Company. Hydrogen Insights A perspective on hydrogen investment, market development and cost competitiveness.
Tech. rep., Hydrogen Council and McKinsey & Company; 2021, URL https:
//hydrogencouncil.com/en/hydrogen-insights-2021/.

13

