npj | computationa lmateria ls Article
Published in partnership with the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics of the Chinese Academy of Sciences
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-025-01796-y
Cross-functional transferability in
foundation machine learning interatomicpotentials
Check for updates
Xu Huang1,2, Bowen Deng1,2, Peichen Zhong1,2, Aaron D. Kaplan2, Kristin A. Persson1,2&
Gerbrand Ceder1,2
The rapid development of foundation potentials (FPs) in machine learning interatomic potentials
demonstrates the possibility for generalizable learning of the universal potential energy surface. Theaccuracy of FPs can be further improved by bridging the model from lower- ﬁdelity datasets to high-
ﬁdelity ones. In this work, we analyze the challenge of this transfer learning (TL) problem within the
CHGNet framework. We show that signi ﬁcant energy scale shifts and poor correlations between GGA
and r
2SCAN hinder cross-functional transferability. By benchmarking different TL approaches on the
MP-r2SCAN dataset, we demonstrate the importance of elemental energy referencing in the TL of FPs.
By comparing the scaling law with and without the pre-training on a low- ﬁdelity dataset, we show that
signi ﬁcant data ef ﬁciency can still be achieved through TL, even with a target dataset of sub-million
structures. We highlight the importance of proper TL and multi- ﬁdelity learning in creating next-
generation FPs on high- ﬁdelity data.
Atomistic simulations provide a powerful framework for predicting and
virtually screening material propertie s and have led to multiple predictions
of interesting functional materials1–3. These simulations are enabled by
accurate determination of the potentia l energy surface (PES) as a function of
atomic positions, permitting predicti on of stability properties, reaction
mechanisms, and dynamic behavior4–7.
Historically, two main approach es have been used to model the PES:
ab-initio quantum chemical calculations and empirical force ﬁelds8.A b -
initio quantum chemical calculations such as density functional theory(DFT) provide high accuracy and gener ality, but at a substantial compu-
tational cost. Furthermore, this cost sca les rapidly with syst em size, typically,
/C24OðN
3
eÞorOðNelogNeÞwith Nethe number of electrons9,10,t h e r e b y
limiting the achievable length and time scales. In contrast, empirical force
ﬁelds typically trade accuracy and generality for speed, limiting their
applicability in complex systems.
To address these limitations, surrogate energy models such as
machine learning interatomic potentials (MLIPs) have been devel-oped to accelerate atomistic simulations. MLIP methods aim todisrupt the long-standing trade-off between accuracy and ef ﬁciency,
achieving near training set accura cy while offering a computational
cost reduction of several orders of magnitude compared to traditionalDFT methods
11and maintaining OðNÞcomputational ef ﬁciency,
where Nis the number of atoms12.MLIPs are parametrized to reproduc e energies from ab-initio quantum
mechanical calculations, such as DFT. The total energy of a material systemis decomposed and predicted thro ugh a learnable mapping of atomic
positions and chemical species, where each atom ’sc o n t r i b u t i o ni sd e t e r -
mined by its surrounding local atomic con ﬁguration within a de ﬁned cutoff
radius:
^E¼X
n
iϕðfr!
jgi;fCjgiÞ;^fi¼/C0∂^E
∂rið1Þ
T h el e a r n a b l ef u n c t i o n ϕmaps the position vectors fr!
jgiand chemical
species fCjgiof neighboring atoms jto the energy contribution of atom i.
Forces f^figare derived as the negative gradient of the total energy with
respect to atomic coordinates. The choice of design features ϕis crucial for
MLIPs to encode the system ’s physical and chemical properties, such as
using equivariant feature encoding13,14and including atomic charge
information15,16.
Recently, foundation potentials (FPs) trained on millions of DFT cal-
culations demonstrate promising tra nsferability in atomic simulations
across diverse chemical spaces. The FPs such as M3GNet17, CHGNet15,
MACE-MP-018, SevenNet-MF-019,a n dO r b20have been developed from
open-source materials database s such as the Materials Project21,22and
Alexandria23. Industry FPs such as GNoME24,M a t t e r S i m25,a n d
1Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, USA.2Materials Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
California, USA. e-mail: bowendeng@berkeley.edu ;gceder@berkeley.edu
npj Computational Materials |          (2025) 11:313 11234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

EquiformerV2-OMAT26demonstrate improved PES predictability with
larger data and model sizes in various downstream materials modeling taskssuch as phonon spectra prediction, pha se diagram construction, catalyst
screening, and molecular dynamics simulations
27–31.
Despite these successes in improvi ng models and data, there remain
challenges for further improvements of FPs. One signi ﬁcant issue reported
by Deng et al.27shows a consistent underprediction of energies and forces in
FPs27, which calls for improved sampling in FP training datasets. The pre-
dominant approach to generate FP data sets relies on DFT calculations using
generalized gradient approximations (GGAs), limiting FPs to GGA-levelaccuracy and posing potential challe nges for migrating to higher-accuracy
functionals like meta-GGAs. Recently, Kaplan et al.
32released the MatPES
dataset that incorporates regularized strongly constrained and appropriately
normed (r2SCAN) meta-GGA functional calculations, which opens the
possibility for FPs to migrate to high level of theory. See ref. 33for a de ﬁ-
nition of GGAs and meta-GGAs and Ref. 34for an overview of their well-
established limitations in describing crystalline and molecular systems.
In this work, we discuss the challen ges and practical approaches that
help better understand the ﬁne-tuning process in FPs, particularly when
dealing with multi- ﬁdelity data transferability across different functionals.
Successfully achieving this multi- ﬁdelity data transferability is crucial, as it
can enable more accurate and ef ﬁcient atomistic simulations without the
substantial computational costs t ypically associated with high- ﬁdelity cal-
culations. By showing the correlation be tween the labels from different levels
of theory, we emphasize the importance o f training at the right scale through
energy referencing when conducting transfer learning.
Results
Data challenges in existing foundation potentials
An essential component in building improved FPs comes from reliabledatasets. The current FP datasets applicable to crystalline materials arepredominantly composed of GGA and GGA +U-level DFT
calculations
15,17,18,20. While GGA-based training data is widely available and
computationally ef ﬁcient to generate, several limitations of GGA are
known35–37and other functionals are now available38–40. A widely used
method to alleviate some of the self-interaction in GGA is the Hubbard U
correction41, which adds an energy correction to localized electron states
(e.g., dorforbitals). The use of +Uis particularly important when dealing
with metal oxidation/reduction in form ation enthalpies, reaction energies,
or electrochemical potentials36,42. At the same time, the application of +Uis
not appropriate for metallic systems where electron delocalization isappropriate. Because of these con ﬂicting requirements, compatibility
schemes between GGA and GGA +Uhave been designed
43and some
datasets contain a mixture of GGA and GGA +Ucalculations. We call
attention to three data challenges in existing FPs, which were primarily
trained with a mixture of GGA/GGA +UDFT calculations.
Firstly, GGA/GGA +Uexhibit lower transferab ility across chemical
bonding environments37. The Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) GGA44is
found to have a mean absolute error (MAE) of 194 meV/atom dominated by
the large error in oxides and strongly bound systems, in a large-scale test onthe formation energy of 987 compounds
45. In contrast, the SCAN meta-
GGA functional developed by Sun et al.38predicts formation energies with
an MAE of 84 meV/atom. Isaacs and Wolverton46also demonstrate that
SCAN is more accurate in predicting formation energy for strongly boundcompounds, crystal volumes, magne tism, and band gaps, as compared to
the PBE GGA. The r
2SCAN39revision of the SCAN meta-GGA balances
numerical stability with high general accuracy45and has therefore become
the preferred method to evaluate thermophysical properties of
materials45,47,48. While the demonstrated prediction errors in Ref. 45are high,
it is worth noting that many of the compounds included have formation
reactions from molecular species such as H 2,N2,O2, and thereby are more
similar to cohesive energies. When evaluating only solid-state reactions,energy errors are typically smaller for GGA
49.
Secondly, the application of the Hubbard Ucorrection to mitigate self-
interaction errors in GGA is inherentl y semi-empirical and non-universal.GGA+Ufails to predict accurate energy differences between some com-
pounds with localized electronic states and those with delocalized electronicstates
43. There is also no precise de ﬁnition of an “optimal ”U,a n da p p r o a -
ches such as the linear response method50s u g g e s tt h a ts u c ha no p t i m a l U
would be system-dependent. However, the GGA/GGA +UFP datasets
were generated using the same Uvalue for each element regardless of the
local environment or formal valence state, calibrated to minimize dis-crepancies between DFT-calculated o xidation energies and experimental
measurements for a limited number of 3 dtransition metal oxides
42,43.
Thirdly, to correct for some of the self-interaction error in GGA which
is particularly large when calculating the energy of reactions that re ﬂect
charge transfer such as oxide forma tion enthalpies, an ad hoc scheme of
mixing GGA and GGA +Ucalculations is typically used to bridge the gap
between GGA and GGA +U43,51. Such coarse-grained, non-universal
adjustments can potentially cause issues when ﬁtting a FP, such as sudden
jumps of potential energy at the scale of a few hundred meV per atom when
moving between training data comput ed with these mixing schemes. Last,
there is no corresponding mixing scheme applied to the GGA/GGA +U
interatomic forces and stresses. This may be less of an issue as both arederivative properties of a given functional, and thus should be independentof the energy scale of the underlying D FT approximation. However, this has
not been formally veri ﬁed.
Overall, the use of approximate exc hange-correlation functionals,
combined with the non-universality of Hubbard Ucorrections and com-
patibility adjustments, leads to less a ccurate and somewhat noisy data within
the GGA/GGA +Uframework. Such data noise makes it challenging for
graph neural network models (GNNs) to accurately learn and capture the
underlying interactions within materials.
Cross-functional transferability challenges in foundation
potentials
One possible solution to overcome the challenges of GGA and GGA +Uis
to shift the FP training and benchmarking dataset to DFT calculationsperformed with higher- ﬁdelity functionals. These higher- ﬁdelity calcula-
tions come with higher computational costs, leading to challenges in con-structing datasets on a substantial scale. One possible solution is to leverageexisting lower- ﬁdelity GGA and GGA +Ucalculations and existing pre-
trained FPs as a starting point.
There are three main strategies to achieve explicit or implicit trans-
ferability between multi- ﬁdelity DFT datasets: transfer learning, multi-
ﬁdelity learning, and mixed multi- ﬁdelity training.
Transfer learning (TL) involves pre- training a large neural network on
extensive lower- ﬁdelity datasets. The pretrained weights from this network
are then transferred to initialize machi ne-learning tasks on smaller, higher-
ﬁdelity datasets. This approach is both computationally ef ﬁcient and data-
efﬁcient
52,53. However, if the correlation between the two different ﬁdelity
datasets is not strong enough, TL is not e ffective and can even deteriorate the
learning performance, known as negative transfer54.
Multi- ﬁdelity learning can be conducted either at the feature (input)
level or at the label (output) level55, i.e., low- ﬁdelity data is utilized as input
features to predict high- ﬁdelity data, or the task of learning high- ﬁdelity data
can be transformed into learning the difference between high- ﬁdelity and
low-ﬁdelity data, an approach known as Δ-machine learning56,57.M u l t i -
ﬁdelity learning tends to be more c omputationally expensive than TL58.
When applying multi- ﬁdelity learned models to make real predictions for
unknown cases, one must ﬁrst calculate low- ﬁdelity data to obtain input
features (input level) or use it to add the predicted difference to get the ﬁnal
high- ﬁdelity prediction (output level).
Mixed multi- ﬁdelity training aims to simult aneously learn and predict
datasets of varying ﬁdelity levels. Chen et al.59encoded the ﬁdelity of each
dataset and embedded the dataset type as a vector in the global state feature
input to the M3GNet model for band gap prediction. Ko and Ong60adopted
this method to construct highly accura te GNN-based interatomic potentials
for two model systems —silicon and water. Allen et al.61used meta-learning
techniques to build pre-trained potent ials that simultaneously incorporatehttps://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-025-01796-y Article
npj Computational Materials |          (2025) 11:313 2

information from multiple large organi c datasets, calculated at different
levels of theory. Kim et al.19developed a high- ﬁdelity MLIP by one-hot
encoding each ﬁdelity, concatenating it to the scalar part of the input node
feature at each linear layer, and adding different atomic energy shift scale
blocks for each ﬁdelity database to the SevenNet model. Similar to TL,
mixed- ﬁdelity training tends to be comput ationally expensive when addi-
tional poorly correlated data a re added to the trained model.
Each of the three strategies presents its own advantages and challenges.
So far, no clear evidence exists that T L consistently outperforms multi-
ﬁdelity learning or mixed multi- ﬁdelity approaches, or vice versa. In this
work, we focus on how to tackle the transferability challenges of ef ﬁcient TL
across GGA/GGA +Umixed data and r2SCAN data in the CHGNet model,
though our conclusion should hold more generally for other FPs.
MP-r2SCAN dataset
We use a r2SCAN dataset, MP-r2SCAN, parsed from Materials Project21,22
r2SCAN relaxation trajectories, for high- ﬁdelity training tasks. Following the
data parsing criteria described in Data preparation, we obtain 34,927
material IDs with 238,247 structures. Compared to the MPtrj Dataset15,
which has 145,923 materials IDs with 1,580,395 structures, the MP-r2SCAN
is signi ﬁcantly smaller in size.
Figure 1a presents the element distribution in the MP-r2SCAN dataset
with a total of 238,247 structures. The color of each element indicates thetotal number of times each element is present in the MP-r
2SCAN dataset,
with a lower cutoff of 1000. Elements with 1000 or fewer occurrences allshare the same color. The MP-r2SCAN dataset covers 88 elements in the
periodic table.
Energy differences across two functionals
Machine learning transferability can be quanti ﬁed by assessing the corre-
lations between the source and target datasets62. To investigate the feasibility
and effectiveness of TL between DFT functionals, we analyze the scale of thetotal energy differences between r
2SCAN and GGA/GGA +U.
Figure 1b presents the comparison of the relaxed total energies cal-
culated using r2SCAN ( x-axis) and GGA/GGA +U(y-axis), which repre-
sent the training label of most FPs. In Fig. 1b, each point represents a single
compound from the Materials Proj ect, and the corresponding GGA/GGA
+Uenergies have applied anion and compatibility corrections63.T h e
marginal histograms on the top and right side show the distributions ofenergies calculated using r
2SCAN and GGA/GGA +U, respectively, for all
r2SCAN materials IDs in Materials Project. As depicted in Fig. 1b, the total
energy of r2SCAN and GGA/GGA +Uare distributed on different scales.
The shift from the GGA/GGA +Uto r2SCAN is at the scale of 0 –70 eV/
atom, which is signi ﬁcantly larger than the energy accuracy of FPs ( ~
30meV/atom), indicating these r2SCAN energy labels are not directly
transferrable without proper reference or normalization.
These eV/atom scale energy shifts between functionals are related to
the ambiguity in the Kohn-Sham energy levels which have an arbitraryreference energy
64–66. These energy shifts are well understood in electronic
structure theory and do not contribute to any physical quantities due to the
Fig. 1 | Statistical analysis of the energy data. a Element distribution of the MP-
r2SCAN dataset of 238,247 structures. The color indicates the total number of
occurrences of an element in the MP-r2SCAN dataset with a lower cutoff of 1000.
bTotal Energy of materials computed from GGA/GGA +U vs. r2SCAN functionals.
Each point represents a material with a materials ID that has r2SCAN calculations in
Materials Project, with the x-axis showing the total energy after r2SCAN structure
relaxation and the y-axis showing the total energy after GGA/GGA +U structure
relaxation. The marginal histograms on the top and right illustrate the distributionsof total energies for the same collection of materials, as calculated by r
2SCAN andGGA/GGA +U, respectively. c,dFeature importance in the formation energy
differences between GGA/GGA +Umixing and r2SCAN. Each element is treated as
a feature, with its importance indicated by colors on the periodic table. Higher values
correspond to greater importance and therefore larger energy difference between
GGA/GGA +Uand r2SCAN. Panel cpresents the feature importance when anion
and compatibility corrections are included in the mixed GGA/GGA +Udata, and
dpresents the feature importance without these adjustments. Compositional cor-
rections are applied primarily to pnictogens, chalcogens, and halogens.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-025-01796-y Article
npj Computational Materials |          (2025) 11:313 3

cancellation of energy references in an y physical property. The total energy
itself is not a physically measurable quantity, as it is “gauge dependent ”on
the vacuum level, but energy differences such as the cohesive energy aremeasurable and gauge invariant
67. Because MLIPs are typically trained on
absolute total energies, these eV/at om scale energy differences from GGA/
GGA+Uand r2SCAN can cause signi ﬁcant challenges in TL.
One method to remove the signi ﬁcant total energy shifts is by ﬁtting the
MLIPs with physical quantities such as formation energies, which has beenshown to be easier to transfer in crystal graph attention networks
52,68.T h e
formation energies describe the streng ths of the interactions that form the
compound from pure elemental phases and are better correlated betweendifferent functionals than the total en ergy labels, although small deviations
can still be present due to the different levels of accuracy.
To determine which elements contribute most to the formation
energy differences between r
2SCAN and GGA/GGA +Ucalculations, we
queried the formation energies from Materials Project and ﬁtted decision
tree models on the formation energy differences through scikit-
learn69. The input to this model is the compositional fraction matrix of
all materials with r2SCAN materials IDs in Materials Project, and the
target variable is the formation energy difference between the twofunctionals. We calculated the feature importance (see Feature impor-tance) for each element and plotted the strength of the importancethrough the color bar in the periodic table in Fig. 1c and d. The
importance of a feature is computed as the normalized total reduction ofthe criterion brought by that feature. The higher the value the moreimportant the feature. Figure 1c presents the feature importance with
GGA/GGA +Umixing and anion corrections included, and Fig. 1d
includes the same analysis but with uncorrected GGA/GGA +Ufor-
mation energies.
In Fig. 1c, we observe that d-block elements such as V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co,
Ni, Mo, and W exhibit high impor tance, indicating they signi ﬁcantly con-
tribute to the formation energ y differences between GGA/GGA +Uand
r
2SCAN. These are precisely the elements for which Hubbard Ucorrections
and compatibility adjustments are ap plied in transition metal oxides and
ﬂuorides. Similarly, p-block elements with high importance —O, F, S, Cl, Se,
Br, and Te —also undergo compatibility corrections when they serve as
anions in compounds. Notably, Cl exhi bits a very high feature importance.
We can attribute the relatively higher feature importance of Cl to two
sources: (i) the compatibility scheme imposed on GGA/GGA +Uenergies
places the second largest correction ( −0.614 eV/atom in magnitude) to Cl,
second only to oxides ( −0.687 eV/atom in magnitude); (ii) PBE struggles to
describe the weaker covalency and van der Waals interactions typical ofionic crystals
70,w h e r e a sr2SCAN describes both covalent and ionic bonding
reasonably well39and improves the description of medium-range van der
Waals interactions71,72. The differences in Fig. 1c and d show clearly that the
removal of the corrections scheme almost eliminates the higher featureimportance of the chalcogens and halogens seen in Fig. 1c. Without the
energy correction scheme, the eigh t transition metals, O, and F remain a
h i g h e rf e a t u r ei m p o r t a n c e( s e eF i g . 1d).
TL with different atomic reference energies
Shifting the PES with a constant value for each element is an effective and
commonly used approach in training GNN-based MLIPs. As described in
Fig.2a, in CHGNet and other models like M3GNet, NequIP13and CACE14,
the prediction of total energies (per atom) is divided into two parts: EAtomRef
andEGNNs17,73. First, the composition row vector celemand atomic reference
energies (AtomRef) Eelemare obtained, and their dot product gives EAtomRef .
The composition vector celemrepresents the fraction of each element in the
structure, and in CHGNet, its dimension is 1 × 94. Next, a compositionmodel is used to ﬁt a linear regression of total energies, where E
elemare the
weights:
Eelem¼ðATAÞ/C01ATEtotalð2ÞHere, Ais the composition matrix obtained by stacking celemfor all struc-
tures in the training set, and Etotalis the matrix of total energies. Subse-
quently, the remaining ﬁne-grained energy is predicted by GNNs. Overall,
the total energy prediction of a structure can be expressed using Etotal=celem
⋅Eelem+EGNNs. Both AtomRef, which represent the weights of the
composition model, and GNNs can be trainable.
For cross-functional TL on a FP with a ﬁtted AtomRef from GGA/
GGA+Utotal energies, one can re ﬁtt h eF P ’s AtomRef to shift the FP ’s
energy to the scale of new DFT labels and, in principle, improve the cor-relation between pre-training and ﬁne-tuning datasets. Re ﬁtting the
AtomRef essentially replaces the ﬁtted GGA/GGA +UAtomRef with the
ﬁtted r
2SCAN AtomRef and shifts the FP ’s predicted energy scale to
r2SCAN. Figure 2b shows that, after replacing the AtomRef, a stronger
correlation between GGA/GGA +Uand r2SCAN total energies can be
achieved.
Indeed, the Pearson ’s correlation coef ﬁcient ρimproves from 0.0917
between the unmodi ﬁed GGA/GGA +Uand r2SCAN datasets to 0.9250
between the r2SCAN energies (with r2SCAN AtomRef subtracted) and the
GGA/GGA +Uenergies (with GGA/GGA +UAtomRef subtracted).
Fig. 2 | Illustration of AtomRef and correlation improvement through scaled
energies. a Schematic representation of the role and application of AtomRef in
calculating total energies. The energy contribution from AtomRef is obtained by
taking the dot product of the composition row vector (with LiCoO 2used here as an
example) and the AtomRef vector. bThe correlation between the scaled energies of
GGA/GGA +Uand r2SCAN (total energies with the respective AtomRefs sub-
tracted). The marginal histograms on the top and right illustrate the distributions ofr
2SCAN and GGA/GGA +Uscaled energies, respectively, for the same collection of
materials.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-025-01796-y Article
npj Computational Materials |          (2025) 11:313 4

To compare in more detail how well various strategies for aligning
energies from different functionals pe rform, we performed an ablation study
using four training strategies to either pre-train or ﬁne-tune CHGNet on the
MP-r2SCAN dataset.
In Method 1 (Training from scratch), we ﬁrstﬁtted AtomRef using the
r2SCAN total energies, randomly in itialized the GNN parameters of
CHGNet, and then trained the GNNs on the MP-r2SCAN dataset while
keeping the r2SCAN AtomRef frozen.
In Method 2 (TL with trainable Ato mRef), we started from the GGA/
GGA+U-pre-trained CHGNet and allowed both the GNN parameters and
the AtomRef to be trainable durin g TL. In this manner, the AtomRef,
initially set to the ﬁtted GGA/GGA +UAtomRef, was gradually updated
throughout the TL process.
In Method 3 (TL with frozen AtomRef), we again used the GGA/GGA
+U-pre-trained CHGNet as the starting point, but only the GNN para-
meters were allowed to be trainable during TL. As a result, the AtomRef
remained ﬁxed at the ﬁtted GGA/GGA +UAtomRef, forcing the GNNs to
transfer and accommodate to the large energy differences observed inFig.1b.
In Method 4 (TL with r
2SCAN AtomRef), we ﬁrst replaced the GGA/
GGA+UAtomRef in the pre-trained CHGNet model with the r2SCAN
AtomRef, and then performed TL on the GNNs while keeping the r2SCAN
AtomRef frozen.
Table 1presents the MAEs on the test set for energy, force, stress, and
magnetic moment (magmom) prediction s (see Data preparation for details
on data splitting). Methods 2 and 3 (TL with trainable and frozen AtomRef,
respectively) yield similar performance across all metrics, with Method 1
(Training from scratch) achieving a comparable energy error (27 meV/atom) but reduced force (45 meV/ Å) and stress error (0.239 GPa). This
suggests that without properly shiftin g the reference energy, neither Method
2 nor Method 3 bene ﬁts from the GGA/GGA +Upre-training. In contrast,
Method 4 (TL with r
2SCAN AtomRef) attained the lowest MAEs for energy,
force, and stress, indicating that the optimal approach to ﬁne-tuning MLIPs
is toﬁrst shift the reference energy and then train the GNNs.
Figure 3shows the model training gradients and training errors vs.
epochs for Method 3 and Method 4 during the TL. Figure 3a illustrates the
range of gradient values for several r epresentative model layers. Gradient
values are recorded every 1/10 of an epoch for these model layers during the
ﬁrst transfer learning epoch. We ob serve that Method 3 without re ﬁtting
AtomRef exhibits gradient magnitudes at least one order larger than those ofMethod 4 with re ﬁtting. Figure 3b and c show the evolution of energy MAE
during the full training process of 50 epochs, without and with AtomRefadjustments, respectively. Figure 3b displays larger initial and ﬁnal energy
MAE, indicating a less effective training process. In contrast, Fig. 3c
demonstrates that re ﬁtting AtomRef results in a more stable and reliable
training history.
Stability prediction from MLIPs
As a more stringent prediction test, we evaluate relative stability of com-pounds through the convex hull constru ction. Relative stability of a com-
pound can be measured by its decomposition energy, calculated by the totalenergy difference between a given com pound and its competing compoundsin a speci ﬁc chemical space. This is a more stringent test than measuring
MAE, as the scale of decomposition energy is small and relies on signi ﬁcant
error cancellation in DFT
74.
Figure 4presents the general work ﬂow for predicting decomposition
energy. Predicting decomposition energy with FPs is particularly challen-
ging as it depends not only on the energy of a single material but also on thatof the neighboring competing phases in a phase diagram
75.T h ep h y s i c a l
outcome of decomposition energy is bi nary with negative values indicating
stable compounds and positive values indicating unstable or metastable
compounds. As such, small non-system atic energy errors from MLIPs will
easily alter the stable entries in the phase diagram, by changing thedecomposition energy from small negati ve values to positive values and vice
versa. This issue is further exacerbated by the fact that machine learningmodels exhibit poorer error cancellation compared to DFT
74.
We constructed all phase diagrams in the chemical space of our dataset
using r2SCAN DFT data and calculated the decomposition energy as the
ground truth. A similar phase diagram can be constructed by the ﬁne-tuned
CHGNet, which allows the determination of CHGNet predicted decom-position energy. The initial con ﬁgurations for all structures are sourced from
Materials Project and further relaxed using the pre-trained or ﬁne-tuned
CHGNet models of corresponding method s. This process relies solely on the
FP’s capability to obtain relaxed energi es and relative stabilities between
polymorphs, without requiring additional information from the DFT phasediagram.
Table 1also presents benchmark results for the decomposition energy
prediction MAEs of four methods on the MP-r
2SCAN test set (see Data
preparation for data splitting). The MAEs of Methods 2 and 3 (41.22 and
38.54 meV/atom, respectively) are slightly larger than that of Method 1(37.44 meV/atom), again indicating no bene ﬁtf r o mc o n v e n t i o n a lT L
methods. In contrast, Method 4, which uses r
2SCAN-speci ﬁcA t o m R e f ,
achieves an MAE of 23.66 meV/atom, at least 13.5 meV/atom lower thanthe others. Additionally, Table 1shows the formation energy MAEs for the
pre-trained or ﬁne-tuned CHGNet models, where formation energy is
deﬁned as the energy difference between a compound and its constituent
elements in their reference states. Method 4 again outperforms the othermethods, with an MAE of 29.38 me V/atom, at least 10 meV/atom
lower than the others. Method 2 has higher MAEs for both decom-
position and formation energies (41.22 and 52.43 meV/atom,
respectively) compared to other methods that freeze AtomRef duringtraining, suggesting that a tr ainable AtomRef may lead to less
accurate predictions in practice.
In the prediction of decomposition energies, we also observed that the
F Pt r a i n e dw i t hM e t h o d2a n dM e t h o d3e x h i b i t e ds o m ef a i l e di o n i crelaxations. Speci ﬁcally, we found that in Method 2, 40 out of 34,927
relaxations, and in Method 3, 30 out of 34,927 relaxations, resulted in at leastone atom being displaced more than 6 Åaway from its nearest neighbors,
creating an unrealistic atomic con ﬁguration that triggered the failure of
force ﬁeld calculations. This is likely due to the unstable PES in the MLIP
created by the large gradient updates in TL without shifting the reference
energy (see Fig. 3). In contrast, Method 4 –TL with r
2SCAN AtomRef,
signiﬁcantly improves prediction accuracy in this complex task of predicting
non-intrinsic properties.
Table 1 | Energy, force, stress, magnetic moment (magmom), decomposition energy, and formation energy prediction MAEs of
different methods
Methods Energy MAE Force MAE Stress MAE Magmom MAE Decomposition energy MAE Formation energy MAE
(meV/atom) (meV/ Å) (GPa) ( μB) (meV/atom) (meV/atom)
Method 1 27 45 0.239 0.019 37.44 43.11
Method 2 26 54 0.266 0.027 41.22 52.43Method 3 26 52 0.257 0.026 38.54 39.78Method 4 17 38 0.167 0.023 23.66 29.38
Method 1: Training from scratch; Method 2: TL with trainable AtomRef; Method 3: TL with frozen AtomRef; Method 4: TL with r2SCAN AtomRef.
Bold values indicate the lowest MAE among the methods.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-025-01796-y Article
npj Computational Materials |          (2025) 11:313 5

Density prediction from MLIPs
Apart from the above benchmarks tha t use DFT-calculated data as ground
truth, we further assess the MLIPs ’ability to predict materials ’density in
comparison with experimental values. r2SCAN is expected to outperform
GGA in this respect, as GGA functionals are known to more signi ﬁcantly
overestimate volumes compared to r2SCAN45. As a result, we expect that the
models ﬁne-tuned on r2SCAN data will yield more accurate density pre-
dictions than the GGA/GGA +Upretrained CHGNet.
To perform this evaluation, we randomly selected 1000 ordered
structures from the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database76(ICSD) database.
For each structure, all lattice vectors were strained by −10%, followed by
structure relaxations using each model with a 30 meV/ Årelaxation con-
vergence threshold. The converged densities were then compared to the
experimental values.
Figure 5presents the distributions of the ratios between experimental
and predicted values for density, f or the pretrained CHGNet and models
t r a i n e db yM e t h o d1 ,M e t h o d2 ,M e t h o d3 ,a n dM e t h o d4 .T h ep l o t sa l s oreport the MAE for each method in the upper left corner.The results show that Method 4 achieves the lowest MAE. Further-
more, the distributions of the experime ntal-to-predicted ratios demonstrate
that the CHGNet model pretrained on GGA tends to underestimate den-
sities to a greater extent, whereas Meth od 4 yields distributions more tightly
centered around the ideal value (ratio = 1) than the other methods. Theseﬁndings indicate that our transfer learning approach from GGA to r
2SCAN
is effective, and that models trained using Method 4 with r2SCAN data have
greater potential for accurate real-w orld volume and density predictions.
Scaling law on transfer learning
To evaluate the data ef ﬁciency improvement of Method 4, we analyzed its
scaling behavior on the MP-r2SCAN dataset. The neural scaling laws suggest
that model performance should improve steadily as the model size, datasetsize, and amount of computing used for training are increased
24,77,78.T h e
performance is expected to follow a power-law relationship with each of
these factors, provided the other two are not limiting. We benchmarked theenergy and force MAEs on the validation set of MP-r
2SCAN using either
Method 1 (Scratch) or Method 4 (Transfer). The resulting validation errorsFig. 3 | Comparison of the model ’s training per-
formance with and without AtomRef re ﬁtting.
aGradient values recorded every 1/10 of an epoch
for various model layers during the ﬁrst transfer
learning epoch, comparing models with and without
AtomRef re ﬁtting. The layers include “AtomEmb ”
(atom embedding), “BondEmb ”(bond embedding),
“AngleEmb ”(angle embedding), “Atom-
Conv0_W0 ”and“AtomConv3_W3 ”(weights of the
two-body atom convolution layers), “Bond-
Conv0_W0 ”and“BondConv2_W3 ”(weights of the
two-body bond convolution layers), and
“MLP_Layer0 ”(weights of the ﬁrst layer in the
multi-layer perceptron). bEnergy training history
for Method 3, showing the lowest energy MAE of18.37 meV/atom at the last epoch. cEnergy training
history for Method 4, showing the lowest energy
MAE of 11.82 meV/atom at the last epoch.
Fig. 4 | Decomposition energy prediction work-ﬂow.The left plot shows a schematic of a convex hull
energy diagram constructed using r
2SCAN DFT-
calculated data, providing decomposition energy
values based on competing phases identi ﬁed in the
DFT phase diagram (e.g., for a 2, the competing
phases are a 1and a 3; for a 4, they are a 3and a 6). The
right plot schematically shows the convex hull
constructed by CHGNet-relaxed energies. Thedecomposition energy and model-identi ﬁed com-
peting phases differ from DFT.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-025-01796-y Article
npj Computational Materials |          (2025) 11:313 6

vs. training sizes are shown in Fig. 6. For each curve in Fig. 6, we performed a
linear regression starting from the d ata point corresponding to more than
1000 training points on the x-axis, yielding the coef ﬁcient of determination
(R2)s h o w ni nt h e ﬁgures. The Linear ﬁts demonstrate a linear scaling law
behavior for both training from scratch (orange) and transfer learning
(blue). The best-performing model fo r both energy and force predictions is
obtained by Transfer, with an energy MAE of 15 meV/atom and a forceMAE of 36 meV/ Å.
The superior data-ef ﬁciency of TL over training from scratch can be
f o u n db yt h er e d u c e dM A Eo fT Li nF i g . 6. For energy MAE in Fig. 6a, the
Scratch curve exhibits a log-log slope of -0.615 with an R
2of 0.994, while the
Transfer curve has a log-log slope of -0.301 with an R2of 0.964. For force
MAE in Fig. 6b, the Scratch curve shows a log-log slope of -0.394 with an R2
of 0.978, while the Transfer curve has a log-log slope of -0.134 with an R2of
0.997. The results indicate TL with merely 1K high- ﬁdelity data points can
outperform training from scratch on a high- ﬁdelity dataset with more than
10K data points, marking more than 10-fold data ef ﬁciency gained from the
GGA pre-training step.
Interestingly, we observe that the superior performance of Transfer
over Scratch does not saturate even given the full-sized MP-r2SCAN dataset
of 0.24 million structures. Assuming the linear scaling trend of both Transferand Scratch, the superior performance of Transfer will only be saturatedafter 719,996 training points for energy and 317,475 training points forforce. This result indica tes TL remains data-ef ﬁcient even with close-to-
million scale high- ﬁdelity data points.
Discussion
The FPs enable ef ﬁcient predictions of energy across diverse chemical
environments, facilitating large-scale simulations with near GGA-levelaccuracy. As the training of FPs is mig rating toward higher levels of DFT
accuracy, optimal transferability s trategies are needed. In this work, we
investigated and benchmarked differ ent transfer learning methods for FPs
with multi- ﬁdelity datasets. We demonstrate that the scale of atomic
reference energies varies signi ﬁcantly across different approximate density
functionals, leading to the non-trivial choice of ﬁne-tuning and TL
approaches. We rationalized the importance of re ﬁtting the atomic refer-
ence energies when ﬁne-tuning MLIPs across multi- ﬁdelity datasets. To
further demonstrate the validity and generality of this transfer learning
approach, we present two additional experiments involving the transfer
learning on other datasets: a halide Van der Waals (vdW) dataset and an
HSE06 dataset, which can be found in the supplementary information. Theresults show that Method 4 consisten tly outperforms the other methods,
achieving the lowest test MAEs for energy, force, and stress, as well as themost robust and smooth training dynamics.The energy quantity that matters for physical behavior is always
referenced to some reference energies and not determined by total energies.For example, the cohesive energy is referenced to the energy of neutral, freeatoms at in ﬁnite separation
67. The formation energy is referenced to the
energy of constituent elemental unaries in their reference states (solid or gas
phase)79,80, and decomposition energy is referenced to the energies of
competing compounds in a given chemical space74. Consequently, the eV/
atom scale shifts in total energy from GGA/GGA +Uto r2SCAN do not lead
to any changes in the physical interaction and behavior of materials.However, as energy is the training label for a ML model, the signi ﬁcant
difference in the energy scales leads to challenges in the convergenceof the TL.
Essentially, by using energy referencing, one can modify the energy loss
component in a model ’s loss function during TL. For a FP with AtomRef,
the general formula for the modi ﬁed energy error of a structure ’sd a t ai s :
EnergyError ¼ E
target
label/C0Esource
GNNsþcelem/C1Esource
elem/C0/C1
/C0celem/C1Etarget
ref/C0Esource
ref/C0/C1
;ð3Þ
where Etarget
labelis the target energy training label, which is often obtained from
high- ﬁdelity calculations. celemis the composition row vector representing
the number of each element in the structure. Esource
elem represents the AtomRef
of the source dataset. Esource
GNNs andcelem/C1Esource
elem are the energy predictions ofFig. 5 | Density prediction benchmark. Distribution of the predicted density ratio
(experimental / predicted) for 1000 Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD)
structures, shown over the range 0.80 –1.20. Results are given for Method 1: training
from scratch, Method 2: TL with trainable AtomRef, Method 3: TL with frozenAtomRef, Method 4: TL with r
2SCAN AtomRef, and the GGA/GGA +Upretrained
CHGNet model. The MAE for density (in g/cm3) for each method is reported in the
upper left corner. The dashed vertical line indicates perfect prediction (ratio = 1).
Fig. 6 | Scaling law on r2SCAN data. a Energy MAE and bForce MAE on the MP-
r2SCAN validation set using either Method 4, TL with r2SCAN AtomRef (Transfer,
blue) or Method 1, training from scratch (Scratch, orange) methods. Zero trainingpoints in Transfer refers to the performance of the GGA/GGA +Upre-trained
CHGNet with r
2SCAN AtomRef. Linear ﬁts are applied for x> 1000 to demonstrate
the neural scaling law, and the coef ﬁcients of determination (R2) are shown in the
ﬁgures.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-025-01796-y Article
npj Computational Materials |          (2025) 11:313 7

the GNN and AtomRef, which sum up to the energy prediction of the source
FP that has been pre-trained from a low- ﬁdelity source dataset. Etarget
refand
Esource
ref are the energy referencing parts of the two functionals, with
dimensions Nelem× 1, representing the reference energies of the structures.
For cohesive energy, the reference energies are the energies of neutral free
atoms at rest; for formation energy, they are the energies of unaries in theirreference states. In our approach, they are also coming from the ﬁtted
AtomRefs.
Energy referencing refers to replacing the AtomRef from E
source
elem to
ðEsource
elemþEtarget
ref/C0Esource
refÞbefore transferring a FP to the target level. After
energy referencing, the remaining cont ribution in the energy loss represents
the differences in atomic interactions approximated by the source (GGA/GGA+U) versus the target (r
2SCAN), which is the relevant part of the
energy that TL on GNNs aims to learn. Using AtomRef as Erefis potentially
better than referencing related to cohesive or formation energy, as AtomRef
obtains atomic reference energies as st atistical averages from all data in the
dataset that covers a vast chemical space.
We attribute the effectiveness of using AtomRef as Ereffor cross-
functional TL to two key factors. Firstly, the more than 10-fold improve-ment in correlation from 0.0917 to 0.9250 (see TL with different atomicreference energies) signi ﬁcantly enhances the effectiveness of TL. Secondly,
reﬁtting AtomRef ensures gradual adju stments of the model weights, and
thus a more stable and reliable training process. Without re ﬁtting AtomRef,
energy shifts cause substantial discre pancies between predicted and target
energies, leading to very large prediction errors and high loss values initially.This, in turn, produces large gradients that cause excessive changes with the
model weights, as illustrated in Fig. 3aa n db .
According to Table 1,M e t h o d4( T Lw i t hr
2SCAN AtomRef) is shown
to be most effective with the lowest energy MAE, consistent with the aboverationalization of this approach. The higher prediction MAEs of Methods 2(TL with trainable AtomRef) and 3 (TL with frozen AtomRef) compared toMethod 4 –which integrates energy re-referencing with GNN-based TL –
highlight the challenges of conventional TL without re ﬁtting AtomRef in
FPs. Methods 2 and 3 exhibit similar MAEs since they both begin withGGA/GGA +UAtomRef, and the large energy shifts between r
2SCAN and
GGA/GGA +Ucause poor correlation and excessive weight adjustments
during early ﬁne-tuning, driving model weights to suboptimal positions
where they can become trapped. Notably, their predictions for forces,
stresses, and magmoms are inferior to those of Method 1 (Training fromscratch), which uses r
2SCAN data directly, free from GGA/GGA +U
inﬂuence. This underperformance is attributed to negative transfer54,
resulting from the weak correlation between source and target datasets
during GNN-based TL.
As it is unlikely that one dataset will rule all of FPs, a well-founded
strategy to integrate diverse datasets, such as Materials Project21,22,
Alexandria23, OQMD81,A F L O W L I B82,N O M A D83,Q M 984,J A R V I S85,
OC2086,O M a t 2 426,O C X 2 487,a n dM a t P E S32, will provide a promising
avenue for leveraging the broad spectrum of available information and
enable integration of future high quality data. Such integration will be
helpful to address the data-originated issues in FPs which are otherwisechallenging to solve by only model architecture improvements
27.O u r
scaling law analysis demonstrates the superior data ef ﬁciency gained from
pre-training on large-scale low- ﬁdelity dataset when migrating to high-
ﬁdelity ones.
As FP-training is expected to transfer to higher quantum chemistry
levels of theory, we also want to highlight the need to establish benchmarktests tailored to these computationally demanding quantum mechanicalmethods, such as r
2SCAN, coupled cluster methods (e.g., CCSD), and multi-
reference approaches. In this work, we exemplify this by introducing sta-
bility benchmarks based on decompos ition energy and formation energy
predictions, as well as the density benchmark which uses experimental
values as ground truth. Current FP benchmarks such as MatbenchDiscovery
88are mostly limited to GGA/GGA +Utasks due to the dataset
limits. We advocate for more comprehensive benchmarking frameworksthat go beyond GGA/GGA +Uand potentially integrate evaluations such
as kinetic properties and more complex material behavior to better assessmodels across different functionals.
In summary, by examining how atomic reference energies in ﬂuence
the performance of GGA/GGA +Uto r
2SCAN TL, we reiterate the
importance of establishing correlations between multi- ﬁdelity datasets so
that they can bene ﬁt from TL. TL with re ﬁtting atomic reference energies
yields a stable and reliable MLIP for energy, interatomic forces, thermo-dynamic stability, and density pred ictions. Our benchmark results and
scaling law analysis show that re ﬁtting atomic energy is data-ef ﬁcient and
convinces ﬁne-tuning FPs to be a practical way for various downstream
materials modeling tasks.
Methods
Data preparation
The r2SCAN Dataset, MP-r2SCAN, is parsed from the Materials Project
Database in March 2024. We collected all the r2SCAN structure optimiza-
tion and static task trajectories und er each material ID that contain these
tasks, and then followed similar criteria as those used in creating the MPtrjDataset: (1) Final frame energies were limited to within 20 meV/atom of theprimary task. (2) Structures missing energy, forces, or electronic con-vergence were excluded. (3) Structures with energies > 1 eV/atom or <10 meV/atom relative to Materials Project ’s ThermoDoc relaxed structures
were ﬁltered out to eliminate large energy differences resulting from var-
i a t i o n si nD F Tc a l c u l a t i o ns e t t i n g s .( 4 )D u p l i c a t es t r u c t u r e sw e r er e m o v e dusing pymatgen ’s StructureMatcher and energy matcher
89.F o ra l l4T L
models, we randomly split the MP-r2SCAN dataset into training, validation,
and test sets with an approximate ratio of 8:1:1 based on material IDs. Thetraining set contains 27,943 material IDs with 190,560 structures; the vali-
dation set contains 3492 material IDs with 23,888 structures; and the test setcontains 3492 material IDs with 23,799 structures. The energy, force, stress,and magmom prediction MAEs are based on the test set ’s 23,799 structures.
The decomposition energy prediction MAE was reported on the test set. Thef o r m a t i o ne n e r g yp r e d i c t i o nM A Ew a sc a l c u l a t e do na l l3 4 , 9 3 8r
2SCAN
m a t e r i a lI D si nt h eM a t e r i a l sP r o j e c t .
Training scheme
We kept most of the settings the same as the pre-trained CHGNet model,except for the following: we changed the ﬁxed GGA/GGA +UAtomRef of
the model to r
2SCAN AtomRef; a Huber loss with energy, force stress and
magmom loss ratio of 3:1:0.1:1 was used to train the model; we used a batchsize of 64 and a learning rate of 10
−3that cosinely decays to 10−5in 50 epochs.
Feature importance
To determine which elements contribute most to the formation energy dif-
ferences between r2SCAN and GGA/GGA +U(discussed in Section Energy
differences across two functionals), we used the attribute feature_-
importances_ inscikit-learn ’sDecisionTreeRegressor .
T h ei m p o r t a n c eo fe a c hn o d eo nt h ed e c i s i o nt r e ec a nb ec a l c u l a t e db y
(assuming only two child nodes (binary tree)):
nj¼wjσj/C0wleftðjÞσleftðjÞ/C0wrightðjÞσrightðjÞ ð4Þ
njrepresents the importance of node j,wjis the weighted number of samples
reaching node j,σjdenotes the impurity value (here it is variance) of node j,
left(j) refers to the child node from the left split on node j,a n dr i g h t ( j) refers
to the child node from th er i g h ts p l i to nn o d e j.
Feature importance is calculated by:
fi¼P
j:node jsplits on feature injP
k:allnodes nkð5Þ
where firepresents the importance of feature i,a n d njrepresents the
importance of node j.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-025-01796-y Article
npj Computational Materials |          (2025) 11:313 8

To obtain the normalized feature im portance, each feature importance
was divided by the total number of atoms of this element in the dataset andthen multiplied by 9,000 for Fig. 1c and 500 for Fig. 1d to scale it back to the
range of 0-1. Finally, it was visualized on the periodic table.
Data availability
The MP-r2SCAN dataset used to ﬁne-tune CHGNet is available at https://
doi.org/10.6084/m9. ﬁgshare.28245650.v290.
Code Availability
The model weights of ﬁne-tuned CHGNet and training con ﬁguration using
Method 4 are available at https://github.com/CederGroupHub/chgnet/tree/
main/chgnet/pretrained/r2scan .
Received: 7 April 2025; Accepted: 4 September 2025;
References
1. Chen, H. et al. Carbonophosphates: a new family of cathode materials
for li-ion batteries identi ﬁed computationally. Chem. Mater. 24,
2009 –2016 (2012).
2. Urban, A., Seo, D.-H. & Ceder, G. Computational understanding of li-
ion batteries. npj Computational Mater. 2,1–13 (2016).
3. Jain, A., Shin, Y. & Persson, K. A. Computational predictions of energy
materials using density functional theory. Nat. Rev. Mater. 1,1–13
(2016).
4. Unke, O. T., Koner, D., Patra, S., Käser, S. & Meuwly, M. High-
dimensional potential energy surfaces for molecular simulations: fromempiricism to machine learning. Mach. Learn.: Sci. Technol. 1, 013001
(2020).
5. Li, L. et al. Representing crystal potential energy surfaces via a
stationary-point network. Acta Materialia 281, 120403 (2024).
6. Kopp, W. A. et al. Automatic potential energy surface exploration by
accelerated reactive molecular dynamics simulations: from pyrolysisto oxidation chemistry. J. Phys. Chem. A 127, 10681 –10692 (2023).
7. Ock, J., Mollaei, P. & Barati Farimani, A. Gradnav: Accelerated
exploration of potential energy surfaces with gradient-based
navigation. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 20, 4088 –4098 (2024).
8. Daw, M. S., Foiles, S. M. & Baskes, M. I. The embedded-atom method:
a review of theory and applications. Mater. Sci. Rep. 9, 251 –310
(1993).
9. Goringe, C., Hernández, E., Gillan, M. & Bush, I. Linear-scaling dft-
pseudopotential calculations on parallel computers. Computer Phys.
Commun. 102,1–16 (1997).
10. Beck, T. L. Real-space mesh techniques in density-functional theory.
Rev. Mod. Phys. 72, 1041 (2000).
11. Podryabinkin, E. V., Tikhonov, E. V., Shapeev, A. V. & Oganov, A. R.
Accelerating crystal structure prediction by machine-learning
interatomic potentials with active learning. Phys. Rev. B 99, 064114
(2019).
12. Zhang, L., Han, J., Wang, H., Car, R. & E, W. Deep potential molecular
dynamics: A scalable model with the accuracy of quantummechanics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 143001 (2018).
13. Batzner, S. et al. E (3)-equivariant graph neural networks for data-
efﬁcient and accurate interatomic potentials. Nat. Commun. 13, 2453
(2022).
14. Cheng, B. Cartesian atomic cluster expansion for machine learning
interatomic potentials. npj Computational Mater. 10, 157 (2024).
15. Deng, B. et al. Chgnet as a pretrained universal neural network
potential for charge-informed atomistic modelling. Nat. Mach. Intell. 5,
1031 –1041 (2023).
16. Kim, D., King, D. S., Zhong, P. & Cheng, B. Learning charges and long-
range interactions from energies and forces. arXiv preprintarXiv:2412.15455 (2024).17. Chen, C. & Ong, S. P. A universal graph deep learning interatomic
potential for the periodic table. Nat. Computational Sci. 2, 718 –728
(2022).
18. Batatia, I. et al. A foundation model for atomistic materials chemistry.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.00096 (2023).
19. Kim, J. et al. Data-ef ﬁcient multi ﬁdelity training for high- ﬁdelity
machine learning interatomic potentials. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 147,
1042 –1054 (2024).
20. Neumann, M. et al. Orb: A fast, scalable neural network potential. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2410.22570 (2024).
21. Jain, A. et al. Commentary: The materials project: A materials genome
approach to accelerating materials innovation. APL Mater. 1, 011002
(2013).
22. Horton, M. K. et al. Accelerated data-driven materials science with the
materials project. Nat. Mater. 24,1–11 (2025).
23. Ghahremanpour, M. M., Van Maaren, P. J. & Van Der Spoel, D. The
alexandria library, a quantum-chemical database of molecularproperties for force ﬁeld development. Sci. data 5,1–10 (2018).
24. Merchant, A. et al. Scaling deep learning for materials discovery.
Nature 624,8 0 –85 (2023).
25. Yang, H. et al. Mattersim: A deep learning atomistic model across
elements, temperatures and pressures. arXiv preprintarXiv:2405.04967 (2024).
26. Barroso-Luque, L. et al. Open materials 2024 (omat24) inorganic
materials dataset and models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.12771 (2024).
27. Deng, B. et al. Systematic softening in universal machine learning
interatomic potentials. npj Computational Mater. 11,1–9 (2025).
28. Yu, H., Giantomassi, M., Materzanini, G., Wang, J. & Rignanese, G.-M.
Systematic assessment of various universal machine-learninginteratomic potentials. Mater. Genome Eng. Adv. 2, e58 (2024).
29. Lan, J. et al. Adsorbml: a leap in ef ﬁciency for adsorption energy
calculations using generalizable machine learning potentials. npj
Computational Mater. 9, 172 (2023).
30. Chen, J., Huang, X., Hua, C., He, Y. & Schwaller, P. A multi-modal
transformer for predicting global minimum adsorption energy. Nat.
Commun. 16, 3232 (2025).
31. Sivak, J. T. et al. Discovering high-entropy oxides with a machine-
learning interatomic potential. Phys. Rev. Lett. 134, 216101 (2025).
32. Kaplan, A. D. et al. A foundational potential energy surface dataset for
materials. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.04070 (2025).
33. Perdew, J. P. & Schmidt, K. vol. 577, 1 (American Institute of Physics,
2001).
34. Kaplan, A. D., Levy, M. & Perdew, J. P. Predictive power of the exact
constraints and approximate norms in density functional theory.Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 74
, 193 –218 (2023).
35. Perdew, J. P. & Zunger, A. Self –interaction correction to
density –functional approximations for many –electron systems. Phys.
Rev. B 23, 5048 –5079 (1981).
36. Zhou, F., Cococcioni, M., Marianetti, C. A., Morgan, D. & Ceder, G.
First-principles prediction of redox potentials in transition-metalcompounds with lda +u.Phys. Rev. B-Condens. Matter Mater. Phys.
70, 235121 (2004).
37. Goerigk, L. et al. A look at the density functional theory zoo with the
advanced GMTKN55 database for general main groupthermochemistry, kinetics and noncovalent interactions. Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys. 19, 32184 –32215 (2017).
38. Sun, J., Ruzsinszky, A. & Perdew, J. P. Strongly constrained and
appropriately normed semilocal density functional. Phys. Rev. Lett.
115, 036402 (2015).
39. Furness, J. W., Kaplan, A. D., Ning, J., Perdew, J. P. & Sun, J. Accurate
and numerically ef ﬁcient r2scan meta-generalized gradient
approximation. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 11, 8208 –8215 (2020).
40. Heyd, J., Scuseria, G. E. & Ernzerhof, M. Hybrid functionals based on a
screened coulomb potential. J. Chem. Phys. 118, 8207 –8215 (2003).https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-025-01796-y Article
npj Computational Materials |          (2025) 11:313 9

41. Anisimov, V. I., Zaanen, J. & Andersen, O. K. Band theory and mott
insulators: Hubbard u instead of stoner i. Phys. Rev. B 44, 943 (1991).
42. Wang, L., Maxisch, T. & Ceder, G. Oxidation energies of transition
metal oxides within the gga +u framework. Phys. Rev. B-Condens.
Matter Mater. Phys. 73, 195107 (2006).
43. Jain, A. et al. Formation enthalpies by mixing gga and gga +u
calculations. Phys. Rev. B-Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 84, 045115
(2011).
44. Perdew, J. P., Burke, K. & Ernzerhof, M. Generalized gradient
approximation made simple. Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865 (1996).
45. Kothakonda, M. et al. Testing the r2scan density functional for the
thermodynamic stability of solids with and without a van der waalscorrection. ACS Mater. Au 3, 102 –111 (2022).
46. Isaacs, E. B. & Wolverton, C. Performance of the strongly constrained
and appropriately normed density functional for solid-state materials.
Phys. Rev. Mater. 2, 063801 (2018).
47. Kingsbury, R. et al. Performance comparison of r 2 scan and scan
metagga density functionals for solid materials via an automated,high-throughput computational work ﬂow.Phys. Rev. Mater. 6,
013801 (2022).
48. Liu, H. et al. Assessing r2scan meta-gga functional for structural
parameters, cohesive energy, mechanical modulus, andthermophysical properties of 3d, 4d, and 5d transition metals. J.
Chem. Phys. 160, 024102 (2024).
49. Hautier, G., Ong, S. P., Jain, A., Moore, C. J. & Ceder, G. Accuracy of
density functional theory in predicting formation energies of ternary
oxides from binary oxides and its implication on phase stability. Phys.
Rev. B-Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 85, 155208 (2012).
50. Cococcioni, M. & de Gironcoli, S. Linear response approach to the
calculation of the effective interaction parameters in the LDA +U
method. Phys. Rev. B 71, 035105 (2005).
51. Kingsbury, R. S. et al. A ﬂexible and scalable scheme for mixing
computed formation energies from different levels of theory. npj
Computational Mater. 8, 195 (2022).
52. Hoffmann, N., Schmidt, J., Botti, S. & Marques, M. A. Transfer learning
on large datasets for the accurate prediction of material properties.Digital Discov. 2, 1368 –1379 (2023).
53. Chen, M. S. et al. Data-ef ﬁcient machine learning potentials from
transfer learning of periodic correlated electronic structure methods:Liquid water at afqmc, ccsd, and ccsd (t) accuracy. J. Chem. Theory
Comput. 19, 4510 –4519 (2023).
54. Wang, Z., Dai, Z., Póczos, B. & Carbonell, J. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,
11293 –11302 (2019).
55. Gong, S. et al. Calibrating dft formation enthalpy calculations by
multi ﬁ
delity machine learning. JACS Au 2, 1964 –1977 (2022).
56. Ramakrishnan, R., Dral, P. O., Rupp, M. & Von Lilienfeld, O. A. Big data
meets quantum chemistry approximations: the δ-machine learning
approach. J. Chem. theory Comput. 11, 2087 –2096 (2015).
57. Pit ﬁeld, J. et al. Augmentation of universal potentials for broad
applications. Phys. Rev. Lett. 134, 056201 (2025).
58. Dral, P. O., Zubatiuk, T. & Xue, B.-X. Learning from multiple quantum
chemical methods: δ-learning, transfer learning, co-kriging, and
beyond. In Quantum Chemistry in the Age of Machine Learning ,
491 –507 (Elsevier, 2023).
59. Chen, C., Zuo, Y., Ye, W., Li, X. & Ong, S. P. Learning properties of
ordered and disordered materials from multi- ﬁdelity data. Nat.
Computational Sci. 1,4 6 –53 (2021).
60. Ko, T. W. & Ong, S. P. Data-ef ﬁcient construction of high- ﬁdelity graph
deep learning interatomic potentials. npj Computational Mater. 11,6 5
(2025).
61. Allen, A. E. et al. Learning together: Towards foundation models for
machine learning interatomic potentials with meta-learning. npj
Computational Mater. 10, 154 (2024).62. Gerace, F., Saglietti, L., Mannelli, S. S., Saxe, A. & Zdeborová, L.
Probing transfer learning with a model of synthetic correlateddatasets. Mach. Learn.: Sci. Technol. 3, 015030 (2022).
63. Wang, A. et al. A framework for quantifying uncertainty in dft energy
corrections. Sci. Rep. 11, 15496 (2021).
64. Choe, D.-H., West, D. & Zhang, S. Revealing the vacuum level in an
inﬁnite solid by real-space potential unfolding. Phys. Rev. B 103,
235202 (2021).
65. Ihm, J., Zunger, A. & Cohen, M. L. Momentum-space formalism for the
total energy of solids. J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 12, 4409 (2001).
66. How, W. B., Chong, S., Grasselli, F., Huguenin-Dumittan, K. K. &
Ceriotti, M. Adaptive energy reference for machine-learningmodels of the electronic density of states. Phys. Rev. Mater. 9,
013802 (2025).
67. Kittel, C. & McEuen, P. Introduction to solid state physics (John Wiley &
Sons, 2018).
68. Schmidt, J., Pettersson, L., Verdozzi, C., Botti, S. & Marques, M. A.
Crystal graph attention networks for the prediction of stable materials.Sci. Adv. 7, eabi7948 (2021).
69. Quinlan, J. R. Induction of decision trees. Mach. Learn. 1,8 1 –
106
(1986).
70. Sun, J. et al. Density functionals that recognize covalent, metallic, and
weak bonds. Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 106401 (2013).
71. Yang, J. H., Kitchaev, D. A. & Ceder, G. Rationalizing accurate
structure prediction in the meta-gga scan functional. Phys. Rev. B
100, 035132 (2019).
72. Ning, J. et al. Workhorse minimally empirical dispersion-corrected
density functional with tests for weakly bound systems: r2SCAN
+rVV10. Phys. Rev. B 106, 075422 (2022).
73. Lupo Pasini, M. et al. Scalable training of trustworthy and energy-
efﬁcient predictive graph foundation models for atomistic materials
modeling: a case study with hydragnn. J. Supercomputing 81, 618
(2025).
74. Bartel, C. J. et al. A critical examination of compound stability
predictions from machine-learned formation energies. npj
computational Mater. 6, 97 (2020).
75. Bartel, C. J. Review of computational approaches to predict the
thermodynamic stability of inorganic solids. J. Mater. Sci. 57,
10475 –10498 (2022).
76. Bergerhoff, G., Hundt, R., Sievers, R. & Brown, I. D. The inorganic
crystal structure data base. J. Chem. Inf. Computer Sci. 23,6 6 –69
(1983).
77. Bahri, Y., Dyer, E., Kaplan, J., Lee, J. & Sharma, U. Explaining neural
scaling laws. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 121, e2311878121 (2024).
78. Frey, N. C. et al. Neural scaling of deep chemical models. Nat. Mach.
Intelligence 5, 1297 –1305 (2023).
79. Xin, X., Lai, W. & Liu, B. Point defect properties in hcp and bcc zr with
trace solute nb revealed by ab initio calculations. J. Nucl. Mater. 393,
197 –202 (2009).
80. Stevanovi ć, V., Lany, S., Zhang, X. & Zunger, A. Correcting density
functional theory for accurate predictions of compound enthalpies offormation: Fitted elemental-phase reference energies. Phys. Rev.
B-Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 85, 115104 (2012).
81. Saal, J. E., Kirklin, S., Aykol, M., Meredig, B. & Wolverton, C. Materials
design and discovery with high-throughput density functional theory:the open quantum materials database (oqmd). Jom 65, 1501 –1509
(2013).
82. Curtarolo, S. et al. A ﬂow: An automatic framework for high-throughput
materials discovery. Computational Mater. Sci. 58, 218 –226 (2012).
83. Draxl, C. & Schef ﬂer, M. The nomad laboratory: from data sharing to
artiﬁcial intelligence. J. Phys.: Mater. 2, 036001 (2019).
84. Ramakrishnan, R., Dral, P. O., Rupp, M. & Von Lilienfeld, O. A.
Quantum chemistry structures and properties of 134 kilo molecules.Sci. data 1,1–7 (2014).https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-025-01796-y Article
npj Computational Materials |          (2025) 11:313 10

85. Choudhary, K. et al. The joint automated repository for various
integrated simulations (jarvis) for data-driven materials design. npj
computational Mater. 6, 173 (2020).
86. Chanussot, L. et al. Open catalyst 2020 (oc20) dataset and community
challenges. Acs Catal. 11, 6059 –6072 (2021).
87. Abed, J. et al. Open catalyst experiments 2024 (ocx24): Bridging
experiments and computational models. arXiv preprintarXiv:2411.11783 (2024).
88. Riebesell, J. et al. A framework to evaluate machine learning crystal
stability predictions, Nat. Mach. Intell .7, 836 –847 (2025).
89. Ong, S. P. et al. Python materials genomics (pymatgen): A robust,
open-source python library for materials analysis. Computational
Mater. Sci. 68, 314 –319 (2013).
90. Huang, X. et al. Materials Project Trajectory Dataset of r2SCAN (MP-
r2SCAN) (2025). https:// ﬁgshare.com/articles/dataset/Materials_
Project_Trajectory_Dataset_of_r_sup_2_sup_SCAN_MPr_sup_2_
sup_SCAN_/28245650 .
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Of ﬁce of Science,
Ofﬁce of Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering
Division under Contract No. DE-AC0205CH11231 (Materials Project pro-gram KC23MP). The work was also supported by the computationalresources provided by the Extreme Science and Engineering DiscoveryEnvironment (XSEDE), supported by National Science Foundation grantnumber ACI1053575; the National Energy Research Scienti ﬁcC o m p u t i n g
Center (NERSC), a U.S. Department of Energy Of ﬁce of Science User Facility
located at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory; and the Swift Clusterresource provided by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL).The authors thank Luca Binci and Lauren N. Walters for valuablediscussions.
Author contributions
B.D. and G.C. conceived the initial idea. X.H. performed Dataset Collection.X.H. benchmarked all the transfer learning methods. X.H. performedexperiments on scaling law analysis. P.Z. and A.K. offered insights into thediscussion of DFT functionals. B.D., K.P. and G.C. offered insights and
guidance throughout the project. All authors contributed to discussions andapproved the paper.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains
supplementary material available athttps://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-025-01796-y
.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to
Bowen Deng or Gerbrand Ceder.
Reprints and permissions information is available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher ’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as longas you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article ’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in thearticle ’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need toobtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of thislicence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
.
© The Author(s) 2025https://doi.org/10.1038/s41524-025-01796-y Article
npj Computational Materials |          (2025) 11:313 11