===== PAPER 0 =====
Compact binary waveform center-of-mass corrections
Charles J. Woodford,1Michael Boyle,2and Harald P. Pfeiﬀer1,3
1Canadian Institute for Theoretical Astrophysics, University of Toronto, 60 Saint George Street, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3H8, Canada
2Cornell Center for Astrophysics and Planetary Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA
3Albert-Einstein-Institut, Max-Planck-Institut für Gravitationsphysik, D-14476 Potsdam-Golm, Germany
(Dated: December 12, 2019)
Wepresentadetailedstudyofthecenter-of-mass(c.m.) motionseeninsimulationsproducedbytheSimulating
eXtremeSpacetimes(SXS)collaboration. Weinvestigatepotentialphysicalsourcesforthelargec.m. motion
in binary black hole simulations and ﬁnd that a signiﬁcant fraction of the c.m. motion cannot be explained
physically,thus concludingthatitis largelya gaugeeﬀect. These largec.m. displacementscausemodemixing
inthegravitationalwaveform,mosteasilyrecognizedasamplitudeoscillationscausedbythedominant (2;2)
modes mixing into subdominant modes. This mixing does notdiminish with increasing distance from the source;
it is present even in asymptotic waveforms, regardless of the method of data extraction. We describe the current
c.m.-correction method used by the SXS collaboration, which is based on counteracting the motion of the c.m. as
measured by the trajectories of the apparent horizons in the simulations, and investigate potential methods to
improvethatcorrectiontothewaveform. Wealsopresentacomplementarymethodforcomputinganoptimal
c.m. correction or evaluating any other c.m. transformation based solely on the asymptotic waveform data.
I. INTRODUCTION
Binary black hole (BBH) systems have been studied for
decades, beginning with analytic work and branching out into
numerical relativity. With the introduction of gravitational-
wavedetectors,particularlyLIGO,thepursuitofBBHgravi-
tationalwaveformshasintensiﬁedinanattempttocreateand
ﬁll vast waveform template banks. Gravitational waveforms
created through numerical relativity are generally the most
accuratewaveformsavailable, andareusedfor parameteresti-
mation and to compare and improve semianalytic and analytic
models of BBHs, which in turn are used for gravitational-wave
detection and parameter estimation [1–3].
While numerical-relativity waveforms are the most accurate
BBH waveforms, there are concerns regarding their validity,
accuracy, and reproducibility. There have been numerous
discussionsonhowtomeasuretheaccuracyofanumericalrel-
ativity simulation and some sources of error in the simulations
have been investigated, including numerical truncation errors,
errorduetoextractionatﬁniteradiusorimperfectextrapolation
toinﬁniteradius,anderrorsbetweensimulationsofdiﬀerent
lengths that otherwise have identical parameters [4–6].
Though not strictly a source of errorlike those named
above,therearealsoconsequencesduetothegaugefreedomof
generalrelativitythatmaybeconfusedforerrorsifnotproperly
understood, and will eﬀectively become sources of error if
ignored[7–9]. Gaugefreedomingeneralrelativityaﬀectsall
numerical relativity simulations, and thus far no numerical
relativity results in the literature have been in a completely
speciﬁed gauge due to this inherent gauge freedom. While
a full accounting of the eﬀects of general gauge freedom is
beyond thescope ofthiswork,we willaddressthe translation
andboostdegreesoffreedom. Reference[ 9]identiﬁedthese
transformations as important for counteracting the observed
motion of the center of mass in simulations produced by the
Simulating eXtreme Spacetimes (SXS) collaboration. Here,
we expand on that analysis, using the recently updated catalogof2,018SXSsimulations[ 10,11],andinvestigatingpossible
improvements to the correction method.
A translation ~and a boost ~will transform the waveform h,
measured at some point distant from the source, as
h(t)!h
t+(~+~t)ˆn
+O
j~jh
+O
j~+~tj2@2
th
;
(1a)
h(t)+@th(t) (~+~t)ˆn; (1b)
where ˆnisthedirectiontotheobserverfromthesource[ 9]. Note
that thisis independent ofthe distance tothe source; even the
asymptoticwaveformwillexhibitthisdependenceregardlessof
anyextrapolation, Cauchy-characteristicextraction, orsimilar
techniques that may be applied to the data. We can understand
this intuitively by thinking about a sphere surrounding the
source. If we displace the source away from the center of
thesphere,anemittedsignalwillarriveatthepartofthesphere
closest to the source before it will arrive at the opposite side
of the sphere. The diﬀerence in arrival times is independent
of the radius of the sphere; it only depends on the size of the
displacement. The additional term in Eq. (1b)introduces an
angular dependence that is not generally included in waveform
models.
Figure 1 demonstrates the eﬀects of c.m. motion for two
systemsfromtheSXScatalog. Themoststrikingexampleis
theupperpairofpanels,whichshowdatafromanonprecessing
system with mass ratio 1.23. On physical grounds, there is
nothing to suggest modulations in the mode ampli

===== PAPER 1 =====
Nonlinearities in Black Hole Ringdowns
Keefe Mitman ,1,Macarena Lagos ,2,yLeo C. Stein ,3,zSizheng Ma ,1Lam Hui,4Yanbei Chen ,1
Nils Deppe ,1François Hébert ,1Lawrence E. Kidder ,5Jordan Moxon ,1
Mark A. Scheel ,1Saul A. Teukolsky ,1, 5William Throwe ,5and Nils L. Vu6
1Theoretical Astrophysics 350-17, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, USA
2Department of Physics and Astronomy, Columbia University, New York, New York 10027, USA
3Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Mississippi, University, Mississippi 38677, USA
4Department of Physics and Astronomy, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA
5Cornell Center for Astrophysics and Planetary Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA
6Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics (Albert Einstein Institute), Am Mühlenberg 1, D-14476 Potsdam, Germany
(Dated: February 24, 2023)
The gravitational wave strain emitted by a perturbed black hole (BH) ringing down is typically
modeled analytically using ﬁrst-order BH perturbation theory. In this Letter we show that second-
order eﬀects are necessary for modeling ringdowns from BH merger simulations. Focusing on the
strain’s (`;m ) = (4;4)angular harmonic, we show the presence of a quadratic eﬀect across a range
of binary BH mass ratios that agrees with theoretical expectations. We ﬁnd that the quadratic (4;4)
mode’s amplitude exhibits quadratic scaling with the fundamental (2;2)mode—its parent mode.
The nonlinear mode’s amplitude is comparable to or even larger than that of the linear (4;4)mode.
Therefore, correctly modeling the ringdown of higher harmonics—improving mode mismatches by up
to 2 orders of magnitude—requires the inclusion of nonlinear eﬀects.
Nonlinearity is responsible for the rich phenomenol-
ogy of general relativity (GR). While many exact non-
linear solutions are known [ 1,2], LIGO-Virgo-KAGRA
observables—gravitational waves (GWs) from merging
binary black holes (BHs)—must be predicted by numeri-
cal relativity (NR). Analytic perturbation theory has an
important role far from the merger: at early times, post-
Newtonian (PN) theory, and at late times (ringdown),
black hole perturbation theory [ 3–5], provided that the
remnant asymptotes to a perturbed Kerr BH [ 6,7]. PN
theory has been pushed to high perturbative order [ 8],
but the standard paradigm for modeling ringdown is only
linear theory (see [ 9] for a review). It may then come as
a surprise if linear theory can be used to model ringdown
even at the peak of the strain [ 10–15], the most nonlinear
phase of a BH merger.
The “magic” nature of the Kerr geometry [ 16] leads
to a decoupled, separable wave equation for ﬁrst-order
perturbations (the Teukolsky equation [ 5]), schematically
written as
T =S; (1)
whereSis a source term that vanishes for linear pertur-
bations in vacuum,  is related to the ﬁrst-order correc-
tion to the curvature scalar  4, and the linear diﬀeren-
tial Teukolsky operator Tdepends on the dimensionless
spin parameter jSj=M2through the combination
a=jSj=M, whereSis the BH spin angular momentum
andMis the BH mass (throughout we use geometric
unitsG=c= 1). The causal Green’s function GT 1
kmitman@caltech.edu
ym.lagos@columbia.edu
zlcstein@olemiss.eduhas an inﬁnite, but discrete set of complex frequency
poles!(`;m;n ).1This makes GWs during ringdown well
described by a superposition of exponentially damped si-
nusoids, called quasinormal modes (QNMs). The real and
imaginary parts of !(`;m;n )determine the QNM oscillation
frequency and decay timescale, respectively. These modes
are labeled by two angular harmonic numbers (`;m)and
an overtone number n. The combination M! (`;m;n )is
entirely determined by .
To date, the linear QNM spectrum has been used to
analyze current GW detections [ 15,19–21], forecast the
futuredetectabilityofringdown[ 22–24], andperformtests
of gravity in the strong ﬁeld regime [25, 26].
Since the sensitivity of GW detectors will increase in
the coming years [ 27–30], there is the potential to ob-
serve nonlinear ringdown eﬀects in high signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) events. A few previous works have shown
that second-order perturbation eﬀects can be identiﬁed in
some NR simulations of binary BH mergers [ 31,32]. In
this Letter we show that quadratic QNMs—the damped
sinusoids coming from second-order perturbation theory
in GR—are a ubiquitous eﬀect present in simulations
across various binary mass ratios and remnant BH spins.
In particular, for the angular harmonic (`;m) = (4;4),
we ﬁnd that the quadratic QNM amplitude exhibits the
expected quadratic scaling relative to its parent—the fun-
damental (2;2)mode. The quadratic amplitude also has
a value that is comparable to that of the linear (4;4)
QNMs for every simulation considered, thus highlighting
1For this study we focus only on prograde modes (in the
sense described in [ 17]), and therefore omit the additional pro-
grade/retrograde label . The Green’s function also has branch
cuts, which lead

===== PAPER 2 =====
PHYSICAL REVIEW RESEARCH 1, 033015 (2019)
Surrogate models for precessing binary black hole simulations with unequal masses
Vijay Varma ,1,*Scott E. Field,2Mark A. Scheel,1Jonathan Blackman,1Davide Gerosa ,3Leo C. Stein,4
Lawrence E. Kidder ,5and Harald P. Pfeiffer6
1TAPIR 350-17, California Institute of Technology, 1200 East California Boulevard, Pasadena, California 91125, USA
2Department of Mathematics, Center for Scientiﬁc Computing and Visualization Research,
University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth, Massachusetts 02747, USA
3School of Physics and Astronomy and Institute for Gravitational Wave Astronomy, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, B15 2TT, United Kingdom
4Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Mississippi, University, Mississippi 38677, USA
5Center for Radiophysics and Space Research, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA
6Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics (Albert Einstein Institute), Am Mühlenberg 1, Potsdam 14476, Germany
(Received 25 July 2019; published 10 October 2019)
Only numerical relativity simulations can capture the full complexities of binary black hole mergers. These
simulations, however, are prohibitively expensive for direct data analysis applications such as parameterestimation. We present two fast and accurate surrogate models for the outputs of these simulations: the ﬁrstmodel, NRSur7dq4, predicts the gravitational waveform and the second model, NRSur7dq4Remnant, predictsthe properties of the remnant black hole. These models extend previous seven-dimensional, noneccentricprecessing models to higher mass ratios and have been trained against 1528 simulations with mass ratiosq/lessorequalslant4 and spin magnitudes χ
1,χ2/lessorequalslant0.8, with generic spin directions. The waveform model, NRSur7dq4,
which begins about 20 orbits before merger, includes all /lscript/lessorequalslant4 spin-weighted spherical harmonic modes, as
well as the precession frame dynamics and spin evolution of the black holes. The ﬁnal black hole model,NRSur7dq4Remnant, models the mass, spin, and recoil kick velocity of the remnant black hole. In their trainingparameter range, both models are shown to be more accurate than existing models by at least an order ofmagnitude, with errors comparable to the estimated errors in the numerical relativity simulations. We also showthat the surrogate models work well even when extrapolated outside their training parameter space range, up tomass ratios q=6.
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevResearch.1.033015
I. INTRODUCTION
As the LIGO [ 1] and Virgo [ 2] detectors reach their de-
sign sensitivity, gravitational wave (GW) detections [ 3–9]a r e
becoming routine [ 10,11]. To maximize the science output of
the data collected by the network of detectors, it is crucialto accurately model the source of the GWs. Among the mostimportant sources for these detectors are binary black hole(BBH) systems, in which two black holes (BHs) lose energythrough GWs, causing them to inspiral and eventually merge.
Numerical relativity (NR) simulations are necessary to
accurately model the late inspiral and merger stages of theBBH evolution. These simulations accurately solve Einstein’sequations to predict the evolution of the BBH spacetime. Themost important outputs of NR simulations are the gravita-tional waveform and the mass, spin, and recoil kick velocityof the remnant BH left after the merger.
*vvarma@caltech.edu
Published by the American Physical Society under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license. Further
distribution of this work must maintain attribution to the author(s)
and the published article’s title, journal citation, and DOI.For interpreting detected signals, model waveforms are
used in comparison with detector data so we can infer theproperties of the source [ 12–14]. The mass and spin of
the remnant determine the black hole ringdown frequencies,which are used in testing general relativity [ 15–17]. In ad-
dition, the recoil kick is astrophysically important because it
can cause the remnant BH to be ejected from its host galaxy
[18–20].
Unfortunately, NR simulations are too expensive to be di-
rectly used in data analysis applications and incorporated intoastrophysical models. As a result, several approximate modelsthat are much faster to evaluate have been developed for bothwaveforms [ 21–31] and remnant properties [ 18,19,32–50].
These models typically assume an underlying phenomenologybased on physical motivations and calibrate any remainingfree parameters to NR simulations.
Among BBHs, systems with BH spins that are misaligned
with respect to the orbital angular momentum are complicatedto model analytically or semianalytically. For these systems,the spins interact with both the orbital angular momentumand each other, causing the system to precess about thedirection of the total angular momentum [ 51]. This precession
is imprinted on the waveform as characteristic modulationsin the amplitude and frequency of the GWs

===== PAPER 3 =====
Eccentric binary black hole surrogate models for the gravitational waveform and
remnant properties: comparable mass, nonspinning case
Tousif Islam,1, 2, 3,∗Vijay Varma,4, 5, 6,†Jackie Lodman,6Scott E. Field,2, 3
Gaurav Khanna,1, 3, 7Mark A. Scheel,6Harald P. Pfeiﬀer,8Davide Gerosa,9and Lawrence E. Kidder5
1Department of Physics, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth, MA 02747, USA
2Department of Mathematics, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth, MA 02747, USA
3Center for Scientiﬁc Computing and Visualization Research, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth, MA 02747, USA
4Department of Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA
5Cornell Center for Astrophysics and Planetary Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA
6TAPIR 350-17, California Institute of Technology, 1200 E California Boulevard, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
7Department of Physics, University of Rhode Island, Kingston, RI 02881, USA
8Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics (Albert Einstein Institute), Am Mühlenberg 1, Potsdam 14476, Germany
9School of Physics and Astronomy & Institute for Gravitational Wave Astronomy,
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2TT, United Kingdom
(Dated: March 26, 2021)
We develop new strategies to build numerical relativity surrogate models for eccentric binary
black hole systems, which are expected to play an increasingly important role in current and future
gravitational-wave detectors. We introduce a new surrogate waveform model, NRSur2dq1Ecc , using
47 nonspinning, equal-mass waveforms with eccentricities up to 0.2when measured at a reference
time of 5500Mbefore merger. This is the ﬁrst waveform model that is directly trained on eccentric
numerical relativity simulations and does not require that the binary circularizes before merger. The
model includes the (2,2),(3,2), and (4,4)spin-weighted spherical harmonic modes. We also build
a ﬁnal black hole model, NRSur2dq1EccRemnant , which models the mass, and spin of the remnant
black hole. We show that our waveform model can accurately predict numerical relativity waveforms
with mismatches≈10−3, while the remnant model can recover the ﬁnal mass and dimensionless spin
with absolute errors smaller than ≈5×10−4Mand≈2×10−3respectively. We demonstrate that
the waveform model can also recover subtle eﬀects like mode-mixing in the ringdown signal without
any special ad-hoc modeling steps. Finally, we show that despite being trained only on equal-mass
binaries, NRSur2dq1Ecc can be reasonably extended up to mass ratio q≈3with mismatches /similarequal10−2
for eccentricities smaller than ∼0.05as measured at a reference time of 2000Mbefore merger. The
methods developed here should prove useful in the building of future eccentric surrogate models over
larger regions of the parameter space.
I. INTRODUCTION
Detection of gravitational waves (GWs) [ 1,2] by the
LIGO[3]andVirgo[ 4]detectorshasopenedanewwindow
in astrophysics to probe binary compact objects – binary
black holes (BBHs) being the most abundant source for
these detectors. Both detection and extraction of source
properties from the GW signal relies on the availability of
accurate inspiral-merger-ringdown (IMR) waveform mod-
els for BBHs. While numerical relativity (NR) provides
the most accurate gravitational waveforms for BBHs, they
are computationally expensive, taking weeks to months to
generate a single waveform. Data-driven surrogate mod-
eling strategies [ 5–15,68] have been shown to be capable
of producing waveforms that are nearly indistinguishable
from NR with evaluation times of less than 0.1seconds.
While NR surrogate waveform models for nonspinning [ 7],
aligned-spin [ 10], and precessing BBHs [ 9,13] are well
developed, NR surrogate modeling of eccentric systems is
completely unexplored.
∗tislam@umassd.edu
†Klarman fellowSo far, all GW detections of BBHs are consistent with
signalsemittedfromquasicircularbinaries[ 16–22]. Infact,
eccentricity has been traditionally ignored in most GW
data analyses (for e.g. Refs. [ 1,2]). This is motivated by
the expectation that even if a binary is formed with a non-
zero eccentricity, it should circularize before reaching the
frequency band of ground based detectors, as eccentricity
gets radiated away via GWs during the long inspiral [ 23].
However, this assumption may not always hold, especially
for binaries formed in dense environments like globular
clusters or galactic nuclei [ 24–31]. Indeed, recent follow-
up analysis of GW190521 [ 32] claim this event to be
consistent with a BBH source with eccentricity ranging
from∼0.1[33] up to∼0.7[34] (see also [35, 36]).
Eccentricity, if present in GW signals, carries precious
astrophysical information about the environment in which
the binary was formed. The detection of an eccentric
merger would not only be a smoking-gun signature of
sources formed via dynamical encounters, but would point
towards speciﬁc type of interactions, namely GW cap-
tures [37], taking place in those environments. 

